 
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 22  
 
 
Revised Edition  
 
 
Statements of Actuarial Opinion Based on Asset  Adequacy Analysis 
for Life  Insurance, Annuity,  or Health  Insurance Reserves and 
Other Liabilities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developed by the  
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 22 of the  
Life Committee  of the  
Actuarial Standards Board  
 
Adopted  by the 
Actuarial Standards  Board  
September  2021  
 
Doc. No. 203
  

 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
ii 
 T A B L E  O  F  C  O N T E N T S 
 
 
Transmittal Memorandum iv 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  1 
1.1 Purpose  1 
1.2 Scope  1 
1.3 Cross References  1 
1.4 Effective Date  2 
 
Section 2. Definitions  2 
2.1 Asset  2 
2.2 Asset Adequacy Analysis  2 
2.3 Cash Flow  2 
2.4 Cash Flow Risk 2 
2.5 Cash Flow Testing  2 
2.6 Gross Premium Reserve  2 
2.7 Gross Premium Reserve Test  2 
2.8 Liability  2 
2.9 Moderately Adverse Conditions  2 
2.10  Scenario  2 
2.11  Subsequent Events  2 
 
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices  3 
3.1 Asset Adequacy Analysis  3 
3.1.1  Analysis Methods  3 
3.1.2  Assump tions  4 
3.1.2.1 Trends  4 
3.1.2.2  Margins  4 
3.1.2.3 Discount R ates 5 
3.1.2.4  Sensitivity Testing of Assumptions  5 
3.1.3 Reinsurance Ceded  5 
3.1.4 Aggregation During Testing 5 
3.1.5 Use of Cash Flows from Other Financial Calculations  5 
3.1.6 Separate Account Assets  6 
3.1.7 Management Action  6 
3.1.8 Use of Data or Analyses Predating the Valuation Date  7 
3.1.9 Testing Horizon  7 
3.1.10 Changes in Methods, Models, or Assumptions  7 
3.1.11 Completeness  7 
3.1.12 Reliance on Others for Data, Projections, and Supporting Analysis  8 
3.1.13 Subsequent Events  8 
3.2 Forming an Opinion with Respect to Asset Adequacy Analysis  8 
3.2.1 Reasonableness of Results  8 
3.2.2 Adequacy of Reserves and Other Liabilities  8 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
iii 
 3.2.3 Analysis of Scenario Results  8 
3.2.4 Aggregation of Results  8 
3.2.5 Results from Prior Years  8 
3.2.6 Opinions of Other Actuaries  9 
3.2.7 Deficiencies  9 
3.3 Statement of Actuarial Opinion Based on Asset Adequacy Analysis  9 
3.4 Documentation  9 
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures  9 
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report  9 
4.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report  11 
 
APPENDIXES  
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices  12 
Background  12 
Current Practices  13 
 
Appendix 2Comments on the Second  Exposure Draft and Responses  15 
 
  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
iv 
  
September  2021  
 
TO: Members of Actuarial Organizations Governed by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons Interested in Statements of 
Actuarial Opinion Based on Asset Adequacy Analysis for Life  Insurance , 
Annuity, or Health Insurance Reserves and Other Liabilities  
 
FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB)  
 
SUBJ:  Proposed Revision of Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 22, Statements 
of Actuarial Opinion Based on Asset Adequacy Analysis for Life  Insurance , 
Annuity, or Health Insurance  Reserves and O ther Liabilities  
 
This document contains a revision of ASOP No. 22, now titled Statements of Actuarial Opinion 
Based on Asset Adequacy Analysis for Life  Insurance , Annuity, or Health Insurance  Reserves 
and Other  Liabilities .  
 
History of the Standard  
 
In 1993, the ASB adopted ASOP No. 22, Statutory Statements of Opinion Based on Asset 
Adequacy Analysis by Appointed Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers , which replaced Financial 
Reporting Recommendation No. 7, Statement of Actuarial Opinion for Life Insurance Company 
Statutory Annual Statements, and No. 11, Statement of Actuarial Opinion for Interest -Indexed  
Universal  Life Insurance Contracts , as guidance for opinions under section 8 of the model 
Actuarial Opinion Memorandum Regulation (1991). 
 
Prior to the adoption, there had been discussions about whether ASOP No. 22 should cover 
opinions under both section 7 and sec tion 8 of the model regulation. The ASB decided to limit 
ASOP No. 22 to cover opinions required under only section 8 and adopted Actuarial Compliance 
Guideline (ACG) No. 4, Statutory Statements of Opinion Not Including an Asset Adequacy 
Analysis by Appoint ed Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers , in October 1993 to provide 
guidance on opinions required under section 7. At the time of this revision to ASOP No. 22, 
ACG No. 4 continues to be relevant for actuaries working for companies that receive an 
exemptio n from asset adequacy analysis.  
 
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the ASB reviewed all standards of practice related to cash flow 
testing. Portions of ASOP No. 14, When to Do Cash Flow Testing for Life and Health Insurance 
Companies , were incorporated in to ASOP No. 7, Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty 
Insurer Cash Flows , and ASOP No. 22. In 2001, the ASB adopted the revised ASOP No. 7 and 
ASOP No. 22 and repealed ASOP No. 14. 
 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
v 
 In December 2012, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) initially 
adopted the Valuation Manual , which sets forth the minimum reserve and related requirements 
for jurisdictions where the Standard Valuation Law , as amended by the NAIC in 2009, has been 
enacted. The Valuation Manual  took effect on January 1, 2017, pursuant to section 11 of the 
Standard Valuation Law . Requirements for the annual actuarial opinion and memorandum 
pursuant to section 3 of the Standard Valuation Law  are provide d in “VM -30, Actuarial Opinion 
and Memorandum Requirements.” In December 2017, the NAIC also adopted Actuarial 
Guideline LI, The Application of Asset Adequacy Testing to Long- Term Care Insurance 
Reserves , which provides uniform guidance and clarification of requirements for asset adequacy 
testing for long- term care insurance.  
 
In response to these NAIC activities, the ASB decided to revise this ASOP.  
 
First Exposure Draft  
 
The first exposure draft was approved by the ASB in December 2018 with a comment de adline 
of June 1, 2019. Fourteen  comment letters were received and considered in making changes that 
are reflected in the second exposure draft.  
 
Second Exposure Draft  
 
The second exposure draft was approved by the ASB in March 2020 with a comment deadline  of 
November 30, 2020. Eight comment letters were received and considered in making changes that 
are reflected in this standard.  
 
For a summary of issues contained in these comment letters, please see appendix 2. 
 
Notable Changes from the Second Exposure Draft  
 
Notable changes made from the second exposure draft to the final standard are summarized 
below. Additional changes were made to improve readability, clarity, or consistency.  
 
1. Modified the definition of subsequent events in section 2.11.  
2. Added references to ASOP Nos. 23, 25, and 56 in sections 3.1.2.1, 3.1.12, and 4.1, as 
appropriate . 
3. Modified the discount rates language in section 3.1.2.3.  
4. Added item (e)  on reflecting in -force management actions in asset adequacy testing in 
section 3.1.7. 
5. Added a disclosure for  discount rates in section 4.1(h ). 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
vi 
 Notable Changes from the Existing ASOP  
 
A cumulative  high- level summary of the notable changes from the existing ASOP are 
summarized below.  
 
1. Changed the purpose, scope, and title from applying to actuaries when providing a 
statement of actuarial opinion for life and health insurers to applying to actuaries when 
providing a statement of actuarial opinion relating to asset adequacy analysis of life 
insurance, annuity, or health insurance reserves  and other liabilities.  
 
2. Added sections  to provide guidance on the following : 
 
• trends in assumptions ( section 3.1.2.1) ; 
 
• assumption margins ( section 3.1.2.2) ; 
 
• discount rates ( section 3.1.2.3) ; 
 
• sensitivity testing ( section 3.1.2.4) ; 
 
• reinsurance ceded ( section 3.1.3) ;  
 
• the use of cash flows from other financial calculations ( section 3.1.5) ; 
 
• separate account assets ( section 3.1.6) ; and   
 
• changes in methods, models, or assumptions ( section 3.1.10) . 
 
3. Significantly revised the management action section ( section 3.1.7).  
 
4. Strengthened documentation requirements ( section 3.4) .  
 
5. Modified disclosure items ( section 4).  
 
 
The ASB is currently converting Actuarial Compliance Guideline (ACG) No. 4, Statutory 
Statements of Opinion Not Including an Asset Adequacy Analysis by Appointed Actuaries for Life 
and Health Insurers , into an ASOP. ACG No. 4 will remain in effect until the ASOP is adopted 
to continue pr oviding guidance to actuaries issuing opinions not including an asset adequacy 
analysis . 
 
The ASB wishes to thank everyone who took the time to contribute comments and suggestions to 
the exposure drafts, and in particular offers special thanks to John MacBain and Martin Snow, 
previous members of the ASOP No. 22 Task Force who contributed to ear lier drafts.  
 
The ASB voted in September 2021 to adopt this standard.   
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
vii 
  
Task  Force  to Revise ASOP  No. 22 
 
Laura A.  Hanson, Chairperson  
Bryan  N. Amburn  Linda  M. Lankowski  
Thomas  A. Campbell  Leslie  M. Jones  
Laurel  A. Kastrup   
 
 
Life Committee  of the ASB  
 
Linda  M. Lankowski , Chairperson  
Janice A.  Duff  Gabriel  Schiminovich 
Lisa S. Kuklinski  Jeremy  Starr   
Donna  C. Megregian   
 
 
 
Actuarial  Standards  Board  
 
Darrell  D. Knapp, Chairperson  
Elizabeth  K. Brill   Cande  J. Olsen  
Robert  M. Damler    Kathleen  A. Riley  
Kevin  M. Dyke    Judy K.  Stromback  
David  E. Neve   Patrick  B. Woods  
 
 
 
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets standards for appropriate actuarial practice  
in the United States through the development and promulgation of Actuarial Standards of 
Pract ice (ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the procedures an actuary should follow when 
performing actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose when 
communicating the results of those services.  
 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
1 
  
ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE NO. 22  
 
STATEMENTS OF ACTUARIAL OPINION BASED ON  
ASSET  ADEQUACY ANALYSIS OF LIFE  INSURANCE, ANNUITY , OR  
HEALTH INSURANCE  RESERVES AND OTHER LIABILITIES   
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  
 
1.1 PurposeThis actuarial standard of practice (ASOP  or standard) provides guidance to 
actuaries when  performing actuarial services with respect to  providing a statement of 
actuarial opinion relating to asset  adequacy analysis  of life  insurance , annuity, or he alth 
insurance  reserves and other liabilities , pursuant to applicable law  (statutes, regulations, 
and other legally binding authority) .   
 
1.2 ScopeThis standard applies to actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect 
to providing a statement  of actuarial opinion based on asset  adequacy analysis  of life 
insurance , annuity, or health insurance reserves and other liabilities , under the following 
circumstances:  
 
a.  the statement of actuarial opinion is prepared to comply with applicable law based 
on the model  Standard Valuation Law and VM -30 of the NAIC Valuation 
Manual ; or 
 
b.  the statement of actuarial opinion is prepared for an insurance company to comply 
with other applicable  law.  
 
If the statement of actuarial opinion encompasses health insurance liabilities , ASOP No. 
28, Statements of Actuarial Opinion Regarding Health Insurance Assets and Liabilities , 
may also apply. If the statement of actuarial opinion includes reinsurance, ASOP No. 11, 
Treatment of Reinsurance or Similar Risk Transf er Programs Involving Life Insurance , 
Annuities, or Health Benefit Plans in Financial Reports , may also apply.   
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with 
applicable law, or for any other reason the actuar y deems appropriate, the actuary should 
refer to section 4. If a conflict exists between this standard and applicable law, the actuary 
should comply with applicable law.  
 
1.3 Cross References When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the originally referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate.  
 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
2 
 1.4 Effective DateThis standard is effective for all statements of actuarial opinion  covered 
by the scope of this ASOP  issued on or after  June 1, 2022. 
 
 
Section 2. Definitions  
 
The definitions below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice  and appear in bold 
throughout the ASOP . 
 
2.1 AssetAny resource that can generate revenue cash flows  or reduce disbursement cash 
flows . 
 
2.2 Asset  Adequacy Analysis An analysis of the adequacy of reserves and other liabilities  
being tested , in light of the asset s supporting such reserves and other liabilities , as 
specified in the statement of actuarial opinion. 
 
2.3 Cash Flow —Any receipt, dis bursement, or transfer of cash  or asset  equivalents ; includes 
policy cash flows  and cash flows  that are not policy related, such as cash flows from 
assets, corporate expenses,  and litigation costs.   
 
2.4 Cash Flow Risk—The risk that the amount or timing of cash flows  will differ from 
expectations or assumptions.  
 
2.5 Cash Flow TestingT he projection and comparison of the timing and amount of cash 
flows  under one or more scenarios  in order to evaluate cash flow risks .  
 
2.6 Gross Premium Reserve The actuarial present value of future benefits, expenses,  and 
related amounts less the actuarial present value of  future gross  premiums and related 
amounts. 
 
2.7 Gross Premium Reserve Test —The comparison of the gross premium reserve computed 
under one or more scenarios  to the financial statement reserves and other liabilities . 
 
2.8 Liability —Any commitment by, or requirement of, an insurer  that can reduce revenue cash 
flows  or generate disbursement cash flows . 
 
2.9 Moderately Adverse Conditions Conditions that include  one or more unfavorable, but 
not extreme, events that have a reasonable probability of occurring during the testing 
period.  
 
2.10 ScenarioA set of economic and other assumptions used in asset adequacy analysis . 
 
2.11 Subsequent E ventsMaterial events that occur  after the valuation date  and before the date 
the statement of actuarial opinion is signed.  
 
 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
3 
 Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices  
 
3.1 Asset  Adequacy Analysis When  performing an asset  adequacy analys is, the actuary 
should choose a block of asset s such that the statement value of those asset s is no greater 
than the statement value of the reserves and other liabilities  being tested . The actuary 
should determine whether additional assets are needed to support the reserves and other  
liabilities  being tested  under moderately adverse conditions . If the actuary determines 
that additional asset s are needed, then the actuary should establish an additional reserve 
equal to the statement value of those additional asset s and test that the total assets, 
including the additional assets, are adequate  to support the reserves and other liabilities  
under moderately adverse conditions . 
 
The actuary should use professional judgment in choosing assets that are appropriate for 
the analysis method and are not used to support reserves and other liabilities  other than 
those being tested  by the actuary. The actuary should take into account  the type s and 
associated risks of the  assets  and liabilities in  the asset adequacy analysis .   
 
3.1.1 Analysis Methods The actuary should use professional judgment in choosing an 
appropriate analysis  method. The actuary may use a single method of analysis for 
all reserves and other liabilities  or a number of different methods of analyses for 
each of several blocks of business. 
 
The actuary should consider using cash flow testing  and should refer to ASOP No. 
7, Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty Insurer Cash Flows . Cash flow 
testing  is generally appropriate where cash flows  vary under different economic 
scenarios .  
 
The actuary may consider using a nalysis  methods other than cash flow testing  to 
evaluate the adequacy of the assets to support the reserves and other liabilities  
being tested . The following are examples of  other analysis methods :  
 
a. Gross Premium Reserve Test A gross premium reserve test  may be 
appropriate  whe n the testing would em phasize the sensitivity of  cash flows  
arising from liabilities  under moderately adverse conditions . For 
example, this type of method may be appropriate for term insurance backed 
by noncallable bonds.  
 
b. Demonstration of Conservatism A demonstration of conservatism may be 
appropriate when the degree of conservatism in the reserves and other 
liabilities  is so great that the cash flows  are covered  under moderately 
adverse conditions . For example, this type of method may be appropriate 
for a block of accidental death and dismemberment insurance if that block 
is reserved using conservative interest rates and mortality/morbidity tables.  
 
c. Demonstration of Immaterial Variation A demonstration that the risks are 
not subject to material varia tion may be appropriate when the cash flow 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
4 
 risks  have been limited by product design and the investment strategy. For 
example, this type of method may be appropriate for a non- life contingent 
payout annuity backed by a cash flow  matched asset  portfolio.  
 
d. Risk Theory Techniques Analysis using risk theory techniques may be 
appropriate when the risks inherent in products with short -duration 
liabilities  are supported by short -duration assets. Such techniques can be 
used to measure cash flows  for risks that are subject to large fluctuations 
that arise infrequently since the cash flows  arising from liabilities  can rarely 
be matched to  the cash flows  arising from assets under moderately adverse 
conditions . For example, this method may be appropriate for risks 
involving a small number of large individual claims over a short period, 
such as catastrophe or stop loss coverage.   
 
e. Loss Ratio Methods Loss  ratio methods may be appropriate when the 
cash flows  are of short duration. Under these  methods , morbidity or 
mortality costs may be tested under  moderately adverse conditions .  For 
example, these methods  may be appropriate for certain short -term disability 
coverages.  
 
3.1.2 Assumptions The actuary should choose  assumptions that are appropriate for the 
analysis.  
 
3.1.2.1 Trends —The actuary should consider reflect ing anticipated trends in the 
assumptions. When determining the level of trend  to apply, if any, the 
actuary should take into account  the following:  
 
a.  whether different trends should be used for different types of 
business . For example, mortality improvement may be different 
between life and annuity products ; 
 
b. the source and credibility of the data from which the assumptions  
are derived (f or further guidance, the actuary should refer to ASOP 
No. 23, Data Quality , and ASOP No. 25, Credibility Procedures ). 
For example, different trends may be appropriate when using 
company experience vs. industry studies ; and  
 
c. the impact of trends on cash flows . For example, the effect of 
future economic conditions on policyholder elections . 
 
3.1.2.2 Margins —The actuary should consider including margins in assumptions 
to reflect adverse deviation . When determining the level of  assumption 
margins , if any, the actuary should take into account the following:  
 
a. the level of uncertainty for the assumption, including sparsity of 
data;  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
5 
  
b. the degree of adverse deviation covered  by the margin;  
 
c.  whether  the margins  vary  over  time ; 
 
d. whether individual margins or aggregate margins are used in the 
analysis;  
 
e. the interaction between assumptions , including the overall impact 
of margins ; and  
 
f.  the possibility that more than one adverse condition could occur 
at one time .   
 
3.1.2.3 Discount Rates When using a n analysis  method that requires the use of 
discount rates, the actuary should choose discount rates that are consistent 
with the yield on assets chosen for  the analysis , any investment strategy  
used in the analysis , and the testing  horizon used in the analysis. 
 
3.1.2.4 Sensitivity Testing  of Assumptions —In setting assumptions and 
assumption margins, the actuary should consider performing sensitivity 
testing of how variations in an assumption or combinations of 
assumptions affect the as set adequacy analysis  results.  
 
3.1.3 Reinsurance  CededThe actuary should consider reflecting reinsurance ceded 
cash flows  in the asset adequacy analysis  regardless of whether the analysis is 
performed for a direct writing company or a reinsurer . In deciding whether and how 
to reflect the reinsurance ceded cash flows , the actuary should solicit information 
from management regarding the extent of reinsurance, the associated cash flows , 
their collectability, any disputes with reinsurers, and practices regarding provisions 
for reinsurance  ceded . The actuary’s considerati on of reinsurance ceded does not 
imply an opinion on the financial condition of any reinsurer.  
 
3.1.4 Aggregation During TestingW hen performing an asset adequacy analysis , the 
actuary may aggregate reserves and  other liabilities  for multiple blocks of business 
if the assets or cash flows  from the blocks are available to support the reserves and 
other liabilities  of the aggregated blocks of business . When performing this 
aggregation, t he actuary should not use assets or cash flows  from one block of 
business to discharge the reserves and other liabilities  of another block of business 
if those assets or cash flows  cannot be used for that purpose.  
 
3.1.5 Use of Cash Flows from Other  Finan cial Calculations If t he actuary uses cash 
flows  from  other financial calculations  (for example , principle -based  reserve or 
capital models) in  the asset  adequacy analysis , the actuary should take into 
account  any differences between the cash flows  in the financial calculations  and 
the asset  adequacy analysis  due to items such as  the following:  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
6 
  
a.  starting  asset s; 
 
b.  assumptions, including margins ; 
 
c.  sensitivities ;  
 
d.  any i nterim shortfalls in accumulated cash flows ;  
 
e.  any requirements for the aggregation of results  that are specified by 
applicable law ;  
 
f. distribution of surplus; and  
 
g.  taxes. 
 
If the actuary uses cash flows  from other financial calculations, t he actuary should 
confirm  that the assumptions underlying these cash flows  are appropriate for an 
asset adequacy analysis  under moderately adverse conditions . 
 
3.1.6 Separate Account Assets When separate account business is included in the 
analysis, the actuary may include separate account assets in excess of separate 
account reserves and other liabilities . This treatment would result in fewer  general 
account assets being us ed in the analysis than if the separate account business had 
been excluded.  
 
The actuary should determine whether it is appropriate to use cash flows  from 
separate account assets  to support reserves and other liabilities  that are not 
associated with the separate account. When making the determination , the actuary 
should take into account any legal restrictions, such as separate account assets  that 
are not chargeable with liabilities  arising out of any other business under  state law .  
 
3.1.7 Management Action When reflecting in -force management actions in the asset 
adequacy analysis , the actuary should take into account  the following:  
 
a.  the insurer’s capacity and intent to t ake such actions;  
 
b. the insurer’s documented procedures and historical practice;  
 
c. the policy provisions;  
 
d.  whether other assumptions, such as policyholder behavior assumptions, are 
reasonable in light of the actions;  
 
e.  whether there  are impediments  to the implementation timeline, such as the 
need to obtain regulatory approval or process limitations; and  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
7 
  
f. whether the actions are reasonable and comply with applicable law . 
 
The actuary should consider quantifying the impacts of these actions  as par t of the 
analysis.  
 
3.1.8 Use of Data or Analyses  Predating the Valuation Date If appropriate, the act uary 
may use data or analyses  predating the valuation date. When using data or analyses  
prior to the valuation date, t he actuary should take into account the  reasonableness 
of such prior period data, studies, analyses, or methods; whether key assumptions 
are still appropriate; and whet her any material events have occurred prior to the 
valuation date that would invalidate the asset  adequacy  analysis  on which the 
statement of actuarial opinion is based. 
 
Examples of data or analyses  an actuary may use include:   
 
a. data taken from a time that predates the valuation date, such as data from 
September 30 to support a December 31 valuation;   
 
b. an asset  adequacy analysis  performed prior to the valuation date ; 
 
c. an analysis performed at the time of policy issue ; and 
 
d. prior analysis of a closed block of business . 
 
3.1.9 Testing HorizonThe actuary should perform an asset  adequacy analysis over a 
period that extends to a point at which, in the actuary’s professional judgment, the 
use of a longer period would not materially affect the results of the analysis.  
 
3.1.10 Changes in Methods, Models, or Assumptions —If the methods, models, or 
assumptions differ from those in the prior  statement of actuarial  opinion, the actuary 
should consider quantifying the impacts of these changes.     
 
The use of new methods, models, or assumptions for new liability  segments (for 
example, a new line of business or product) or new asset  amounts is not a change 
within the meaning of this section. 
 
3.1.11 Completeness When performing t he asset  adequacy analysis , the actuary  should 
take into account anticipated material cash flows  such as renewal premiums, 
guaranteed and nonguarant eed benefits  and charges , expenses, and taxes. In 
determining the asset s supporting the tested  reserves and other liabilities , the 
actuary should take into account any asset  segmentation system used by the 
company.  
 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
8 
 The actuary should confirm that the total amount of any reserves and other 
liabilities  reported as “not analyzed” is  immaterial.  
 
3.1.12 Reliance on Others for Data, Projections, and Supporting Analysis —The actuary 
may rely on data, projections, and supporting analysis supplied by ot hers. When 
practicable, t he actuary should review the data, projections, and supporting analysis 
for reasonableness and consistency. For further guidance, the actuary should refer 
to ASOP No. 23,  ASOP No. 41 , Actuarial Communications , and ASOP No. 56, 
Modeling. The actuary should disclose the extent of any such reliance.   
 
3.1.13 Subsequent Events The actuary should make a reasonable effort to be informed 
about subsequent  events .   
 
3.2 Forming an Opinion with Respect to Asset  Adequacy Analysis When forming an opinion 
with respect to  asset  adequacy  analysis , the actuary should follow the guidance below . 
 
3.2.1 Reasonableness of Results The actuary should review the modeled future 
economic and experience conditions and test results for reasonableness.  
 
3.2.2 Adequacy of Reserves and Other Liabilities The actuary should determine 
whether the reserves and other liabilities  being tested  are adequate under 
moderately adverse conditions , in light of the asset s supporting such reserves and 
other liabilities . The actuary should recognize that holding reserves or other 
liabilities  so great as to withstand any conceivable circumstance, no matter how 
adverse, may imply an excessive level of reserves or other liabilities .  
 
3.2.3 Analysis of Scenario Results If the supporting asset s are insufficient to meet the 
reserves and other liabilities  under a scenario , the actuary should consider whether 
further analysis is required. However, this situation does not necessarily mandate 
additional reserves or other liabilities . Further analysis may indicate that current 
reserves and other liabilities  are adequate. For example, if a large number of 
scenarios  were run, the failure of a small percentage of them may not indicate the 
need for additional reserves or  other  liabilities .  
 
3.2.4 Aggregation of Results If business segments are modeled separately , the actuary 
may consider offset ting deficiencies in one business segment with sufficiencies in 
another business segment for the purposes of reporting and documenting the results 
of testing. When considering aggregation of results to offset deficiencies, t he 
actuary should take into account the type and timing of cash flows , the related cash 
flow risks , and the comparability of elements of the analysis  such as analysis 
methods, scenarios , discount rates, and sensitivity of assumptions.   
 
3.2.5 Results from Prior Years The actuary should consider analyzing  the results over 
time and reconcili ng the  results from prior years . 
 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
9 
 3.2.6 Opinions of Other Actuaries When more than one actuary contributes to the asset 
adequacy analysis , the opining actuary should form an overall opinion without 
claiming reliance on the opinions of other actuaries.  
 
3.2.7 Deficiencies The actuary should be  aware of any deficiencies or limitations in the 
data, analyses, assumptions, or related information used in the asset adequacy 
analysis . 
 
3.3 Statement of Actuarial Opinion Based on  Asset Adequacy  AnalysisThe  actuary should 
follow the  form, content, and recommended language of the statement of actuarial opinion, 
as specified by applicable law. The actuary should identify the intended purpose of the 
statement of actuarial opinion. The actuary should include a statement on the adequacy of 
reserves and other liabilities  based on an asset  adequacy analysis , the details of which are 
contained in the supporting memorandum.   
 
3.4 Documentation—The act uary should prepar e and retain documentation to support 
compliance with the requirements of section 3 and the disclosure requirements of section 
4. The actuary should prepare such documentation in a form such that another actuary 
qualified in the same practice area could assess the reasonableness of the actuary’s work. 
The degree of such documentation should be based on the profe ssional judgment of the 
actuary  and may vary with the complexity and purpose of the actuarial services. In addition, 
the actu ary should refer to ASOP No. 41  for guidance related to the retention of file 
material other than that which is to be disclosed under section 4.  
 
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures  
 
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report —When issuing an actuarial report  to which 
this standard applies , including statements of actuarial opinion, regulato ry asset  adequacy 
issues summaries (RAAISs), and supporting memoranda,  the actuary should refer to ASOP 
Nos. 7, 11, 23, 25, 28, 41, and 56, as applicable. In addition, the actuary should disclose 
the following, w hether or not required by applicable law : 
 
a. the intended purpose of the statement of actuarial opinion and a statement on the 
adequacy of reserves and other liabilities  based on an asset  adequacy analysis  (see 
section 3.3);  
 
b. whether additional reserves have been established due to the asset adequacy 
analysis  (see section 3.1 ); 
 
c. the assets chosen, the methodology used for their selection, and their 
appropriateness for the analysis method (see section 3.1);  
 
d. the asset adequacy analysis  methods chosen, and the information and analysis 
used to support the determination that the method is appropriate for the reserves 
and other liabilities  being tested (see section 3.1.1) ; 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
10 
  
e. the material risks analyzed, any sensitivity tests performed on those risks, and the 
results of those tests, when relevant (see sections 3.1 and 3.1.2.4);  
 
f. the assumptions chosen and any  trends reflected in the assumptions  (see section s 
3.1 and 3.1.2) ;  
 
g. the margins chosen, even if the actuary concludes that a margin is not necessary  
(see section 3. 1.2.2) ; 
 
h. any discount rates used (section 3.1.2.3);  
 
i. whether and how reinsurance ceded cash flows  were reflected in the asset 
adequacy analysis  (see section 3.1.3) ; 
 
j. whether any aggregation was done, either during testing or during analysis of 
results  (see section s 3.1.4 and 3.2.4) ;  
 
k. the use of cash flows  from other financial calculations in the asset adequacy 
analysis (see section 3.1.5);  
 
l. the use of assets, reserves and other liabilities , and cash flows  from the separate 
account in the asset adequacy analysis  (see section 3.1.6);  
 
m. any management actions  reflected in the asset adequacy analysis  (see section 
3.1.7);  
 
n. the use of any prior period data, studies, financial analyses , and methods ; whether 
such use is  still appropriate; and whether any  material events have occurred prior 
to the valuation date that would invalidate the asset  adequacy analysis  on which 
the statement of actuarial opinion is based (s ee section 3.1.8) ; 
 
o. the testing horizon used in the asset adequacy analysis  (see section 3 .1.9); 
 
p. any material changes in the methods, models, or assumptions from those used in 
the prior statement of actuarial opinion or if the models, assumptions, or methods 
used in the prior statement of actuarial opinion are unknown (see section 3.1.10);  
 
q. the basis of any judgment that the total amount of any reserves and other liabilities  
reported as “not analyzed” is immaterial (see section 3.1.11);  
 
r. the extent of  any reliance on the  data, projections, or supporting analysis  of other s 
(see section 3. 1.12) ; 
 
s. any subsequent events  of which the actuary is aware (see section 3 .1.13);   
 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
11 
 t. the criteria used to form an opinion about  the adequacy of reserves or other 
liabilities  (see section 3.2 .2); and  
 
u. any deficiencies or limitations in the data, analyses, assumptions , or related 
information  used in the asset adequacy analysis  (see section 3.2.7) . 
 
4.2 Additional Disclosures  in an Actuarial Report —The actuary should also include 
disclosures in accordance with ASOP No. 41 in an actuarial report for the following 
circumstances:  
 
a.  if any material assumption or method was prescribed by applicable law;  
 
b.  if the actuary states reliance on other so urces and thereby disclaims responsibility 
for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; 
and 
 
c.  if in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary has deviated materially from 
the guidance of this ASOP. 
  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
12 
 Appendix 1  
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 
Note : This appendix is provided for informational purposes and  is not part of the standard of 
practice.  
 
Background  
 
In 1975, the Nat ional Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) began requiring that a 
statement of actuarial opinion on reserves and related actuarial items be included in the annual 
statement filed by life and health insurance companies. In response to this requirem ent, the 
American Academy of Actuaries promulgated Financial Reporting Recommendation No. 7, 
Statement of Actuarial Opinion for Life Insurance Company Statutory Annual Statements, setting 
forth the actuary’s professional responsibilities in providing such an opinion. 
 
The form and content of this actuarial opinion, as specified in the instructions to the annual 
statement, dealt specifically with reserves and did not explicitly address the adequacy of the 
assets supporting these reserves and other liabilitie s to meet the obligations of the company. 
Although not explicitly required to do so by the opinion or by existing professional standards, 
some actuaries began to analyze the adequacy of assets in forming their opinions. In addition, 
when the state of New Y ork adopted the 1980 amendments to the Standard Valuation Law , it 
established an optional valuation basis for annuities, permitting lower reserves provided that an 
asset adequacy analysis supported the actuarial opinion with respect to such reserves.  
 
The type of asset adequacy analysis most widely used by actuaries is multi -scenario cash flow 
testing. To guide actuaries choosing to use this technique, the Actuarial Standards Board (ASB)  
adopted ASOP No. 7, then titled Performing Cash Flow Te sting for Insurers , in October 1988. In 
addition, in July 1990, the ASB adopted ASOP No. 14, When to Do Cash Flow Testing for Life 
and Health Insurance Companies, to provide guidance in determining whether to do cash flow 
testing in forming a professional opinion or recommendation. 
 
In December 1990, the NAIC amended the Standard Valuation Law , and, in June 1991, the 
NAIC adopted the Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Regulation (AOMR) . These actions had 
the effect of moving the requirement for the statement of actuarial opinion from the annual 
statement instructions into the model law itself and provided detailed instructions for the form 
and content of the opinion and the newly requir ed supporting memorandum. The most significant 
changes made by the NAIC in the 1991 AOMR  were  that com panies were required to name an 
appointed actuary, and, for companies subject to s ection 8 of the AOMR , statements of actuarial 
opinion on reserve and ot her liability adequacy were required to be based on an asset adequacy 
analysis described in the supporting memorandum. The asset adequacy analysis required by the 
regulation must conform to the standards of practice promulgated by the ASB.  
 
For companies s ubject to s ection 7, the 1991 AOMR  required an actuarial opinion that the 
reserves and related actuarial items have been calculated in accordance with the Standard 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
13 
 Valuation Law  and supporting regulations. Section 7 of the 1991 AOMR did not require an 
opinion on reserve adequacy.  
 
The ASB  adopted Actuarial Compliance Guideline (ACG) No. 4, Statutory Statements of 
Opinion Not Including an Asset Adequacy Analysis by Appointed Actuaries for Life and Health 
Insurers, i n 1993 to provide guidance for s ection 7 opinions.  
 
In 1993, t he ASB also adopted ASOP No. 22, Statutory Statements of Opinion Based on Asset 
Adequacy Analysis  by Appointed Actuaries  for Life or Health Insurers , which replaced Financial 
Reporting Recommendation Nos . 7 and 11 as guidance for s ection 8 opinions.  
 
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the ASB reviewed all standards of practice related to cash flow 
testing. Portions of ASOP No. 14 were incorporated into  ASOP No s. 7 and 22. In 2001, the ASB 
adopt ed the revised ASOP No s. 7 and 22 and repeal ed ASOP No. 14. 
 
Starting in 2001, the model AOMR  adopted by the NAIC  required all  actuarial opinions to be 
based on asset adequacy analysis.  
 
In addition to the AOMR , actuarial opinions are required under the NAIC’s Synthetic Guaranteed 
Investment Contracts Model Regulation and under the NAIC’s Separate Accounts Fundi ng 
Guaranteed Minimum Benefits under Group Contracts Model Regulation.  
 
In 2012, the NAIC initially adopted the Valuation Manual , which sets forth the minimum reserve 
and related requi rements for jurisdictions where the Standard Valuation Law , as amended by the 
NAIC in 2009, has been enacted. The Valuation Manual  took effect  on January 1, 2017, pursuant 
to section 11 of the Standard Valuation Law . Requirements for the annual actuarial o pinion and 
memorandum pursuant to s ection 3 of the Standard Valuation Law  are provided in “ VM-30: 
Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Requirements.”  In December 2017, the NAIC adopted 
Actuarial Guideline LI, The Application of Asset Adequacy Testing to Long- Term Care 
Insurance Reserves , which provides uniform guidance and clarification of requirements for asset 
adequacy testing for long -term care insurance.   
 
In response to these NAIC activities, the ASB decided to revise this ASOP.  
 
Current Practices  
 
Statements of actuarial opinion on reserves and related items have been provided since 1975, and 
practice regarding  the basic elements of the opinion is well established. With respect to opinions 
based on asset adeq uacy analysis, current practice continues to evolve.  
 
Actuaries who perform asset adequacy analysis use professional judgment in choosing the 
appropriate methods, testing periods, modeling techniques, levels of aggregation, etc. The 
actuary forms an opinion based on the results of the asset adequacy analysis results and any 
additional analyses needed to render that opinion. The actuarial memorandum discloses the 
details of the asset adequacy analysis and the basis for the actuary’s opinion. Additional 
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
14 
 docum entation may be prepared by the actuary as appropriate to support the actuarial 
memorandum.  
 
  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
15 
 Appendix 2  
 
Comments on the Second  Exposure Draft and Responses  
  
The second  exposure draft of this ASOP, Statements of Actuarial Opinion Based on Asset 
Adequacy Analysis for Life  Insurance, Annuity, or Health Insurance Reserves and Other 
Liabilities , was approved  in March 2020 with a comment deadline of November 30, 2020. Eight 
comment letters were received , some of which were submitted on behalf of multiple 
commentators, such as by firms or committees. For purposes of this appendix, the term 
“commentator” may refer to more than one person associated with a particular comment letter.  
The ASOP No. 22 Task Force and Life Committee carefully considered all comments received, 
and the ASB reviewed  (and modified, where appropriate)  the changes proposed. 
 
Summarized below are the signi ficant issues and questions contained in the comment letters and 
responses. Minor wording or punctuation changes that were suggested but not significant are not 
reflected in the appendix, although they may have been adopted.  
 
The term “reviewers” in append ix 2 includes the ASOP No. 22 Task Force , the ASB Life 
Committee, and the ASB. Also, unless otherwise noted, the section numbers and titles used in 
appendix 2 refer to those in the second  exposure draft. 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing the phrase “reserves and other liabilities” with “liabilities.”  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change . 
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS  
Section 2.1, Asset  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator believed the definition of assets was vague and proposed rewording the 
definition of assets to align  with the definition under statutory accounting principles.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change . 
Section 2.3, Cash Flow  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator said “or other assets”  was unclear and suggested  clarifying  the phrase.  
 
The reviewers agree and clarified the language.  
Section 2.4, Cash Flow Risk  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One reviewer suggested replacing the phrase “expectations or assumptions” with either 
“expectations ” or “assumptions ” because they have the same meaning . 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change . 
Section 2.5 , Cash Flow Testing  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested that the use of the term “cash flow risk” should be singular 
throughout the ASOP.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
16 
 Section 2.10, Scenario  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing “economic and other assumptions” with “assumptions.”  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 2.11, Subsequent Events  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested removing the word “material” from the definition of subsequent 
events.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change in response to this comment.  
Comment  
 
 
Response  Two commentators suggested using the date the statement of actuarial opinion is signed rather 
than the date the statement of actuarial opinion is filed.  
 
The reviewe rs agree and made the change.  
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES  
Section 3.1 , Asset Adequacy Analysis  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding a list of specific asset risks to be considered.  
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and therefore made no change in response to 
this comment.   
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested clarifying that asset adequacy reserves established in prior years 
should be excluded when performing asset adequacy analysis.  
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and therefore made no change in response to 
this comment.   
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested modifying the language to remove the implication that asset 
adequacy analysis is a guarantee.  
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language.  
Section 3.1 .1, Analysis Methods  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator proposed additional disclosure when liability cash flows have a material 
dependency on the asset cash flows and cash flow testing is not used.  
 
The reviewers believe the guidance covers these issues at the appropriate level of detail and made 
no change in response to this comment.  
Comment  
 
Response  Several commentators suggested wording to clarify when cash flow testing would be appropriate.  
 
The reviewers agree and clarified the language.  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested  specifying that the methods given in the e xamples should  only be  
considered when  cash f low te sting is not war ranted, and not  as alternativ es in genera l.  
 
The reviewers believe  the guidance is appropriate and note that  section  3.1.1 states “ The actuary 
should use professional judgment in choosing an appropriate analysis method.” The reviewers  
made no change  in response to this comment . 
Section 3.1.1(a), Gross Premium Reserve Test  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested additional language to clarify when GPV would not be appropriate.  
 
The reviewers believe  the guidance  is appropriate and made no change  in response to this 
comment .  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
17 
 Section 3.1.1(c ), Demonstration of Immaterial Variation  
Comment  
 
Response  Two commentators suggested additional language for the example.  
 
The reviewers agree and updated the language.  
Section 3.1.1(e ), Loss Ratio Methods  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding a definition for “Loss Ratio Method.”  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change in response to this comment.  
Section 3.1.2.1,  Trends  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding a reference to ASOP No. 25 , Credibility Procedures , and 
adding more detail regarding the impact of the source and credibility of data when setting 
assumption trends.  
 
The reviewers added references to ASOP No. 23 , Data Quality , and ASOP No. 25.  
Section 3.1.2.1(c)   
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator noted that the consideration of trends should not be dependent on the results of 
the analysis.  
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language . 
Section 3.1.2.2 , Margins  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One comment ator suggested that the actuary should document the rationale for excluding margin 
in an assumption.  
 
The reviewers note that this is covered in section s 3.4 and 4.1(g) and made no change . 
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding a provision for th e actuary to consider the overall impact of 
margins included in the analysis when determining the level of assumption margin.  
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language accordingly.  
Section 3.1.2.2(g)   
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing  “the impact of any prescribed margin  on the overall 
analysis” with “whether the margin  is prescribed.”  
 
The reviewers removed the reference to prescribed margins in response to another comment.  
Section 3.1.2.3 , Discount Rates  
Comment  
 
Response  Two commentators suggested that the discount rate should also reflect reinvestment rates.  
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language accordingly.  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested modifying the language so it applies to all analysis methods.  
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language accordingly.   
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding detailed guidance for choosing a discount rate when cash -
flow testing is used.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change in response to this comment.   
Section 3.1.3, Reinsurance Ceded  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
18 
 Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding more detail for direct written business.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 3.1.4, Aggregation During Testing 
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding language related to AG 51 limitations on aggregation.  
 
The reviewers believe this is already addressed in section 3.2.4 and ASOP No. 1, Introductory 
Actuarial Standard of Practice,  and made no change . 
Section 3.1.5 , Use of Cash Flows from Other Financial Calculations  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator questioned whether cash flows from  one scenario-based calculation would be 
used in another scenario-based calcula tion. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and made no change in response to this 
comment.  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested delet ing “under moderately adverse conditions” because the phrase is 
not necessary.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change in response to this comment.  
Section 3. 1.6, Separate Account Assets  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested providing a definition of “insulated .” 
 
The reviewers clarified  the language.  
Section 3. 1.7, Management Action  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing the word “changes” with “actions” in the last sentence.  
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.    
Comment  
 
 
Response  Two commentators suggested adding  a consideration reflecting obstacles to the implementation of 
management actions, such as regulatory approval.  
 
The reviewers agree and  added new section 3.1.7(e) . 
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested changing the wording from “consider quantifyi ng” to “quantify” the 
impacts of these changes as part of the analysis.    
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change  in response to this comment .      
Comment  
 
Response  Two commentators observed that there was an inconsistency between 3.1.7 and 4.1 (l). 
 
The reviewers agree and made a change to 4.1 (l) (now section 4.1[m]) . 
Section 3. 1.8, Use of Data or Analyses Predating the Valuation Date  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing “opinion” with “statement of actuarial opinion” in sections 
3.1.8, 3.1.10, 4.1 (m), and 4.1(o)  (now sections 4.1[n] and 4.1[o], respectively) . 
 
The reviewers agree and made the changes.  
Section 3.1 .10, Changes in Methods, Models, or Assumptions  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  Two commentators suggested removing “Similarly, when the analysis is based on the periodic 
updating of experience data, factors, or weights, such periodic updating is not a change within the 
meaning of this section.”  
 
The reviewers agree and removed the language.  
 
ASOP No. 22—Doc. No. 203 
19 
 Section 3. 1.11,  Completeness  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentato r suggested replacing “not analyzed” with “that has not been subject to asset 
adequacy analysis.” 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change  in response to this comment . 
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding more detail and examples to describe anticipated material 
cash flows.  
 
The reviewers believe the guidance covers these issues at the ap propriate level of detail and 
therefore made no change  in response to this comment . 
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested clarification regarding how the A SOP rec onciles with  language in 
the Actuarial Opinion  and M emorandum  Regulation (Se ction 5.E.1), which re quires that “the 
statement of act uarial op inion shall apply to all in  force business on t he statement  date… .” 
 
The reviewers believe that the interpretation of regulations is be yond the scope of the standard 
and t herefore made no change  in response to this comment . 
Section 3.1.13, Subsequent Events  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested that additional guidance was needed related to the disclosure of 
subsequent events.  
 
The reviewers believe that this is sue is addressed in section 4.1( r) (now section 4.1[s]) of this 
ASOP , as well as in ASOP No. 41 , Actuarial Communication s, and therefore made no change.   
Section 3.2.6 , Opinions of Other Actuaries  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding the word “only” to claiming reliance on the opinions of other 
actuaries.   
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 3.4, Documentation  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting “or could  assume  the assignment  if necessary.”  
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
SECTION 4. COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES  
4.1, Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator noted that the disclosures in  section  4.1 do not need to be repeated in each 
document.   
 
The reviewers agree and clarified the language.  
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard 
of Practice  
No. 33 
 
  
Actuarial Responsibilities  
with Respect to Closed Blocks in  
Mutual Life Insurance Company Conversions  
   
 
   
 
Developed by the 
Closed Block Task  Force of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
  
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
January 1999 
Updated for Deviation Language Effective May 1, 2011 
 
(Doc. No. 150)
 
 iiT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S  
 
Transmittal Memorandum          iv  
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 1.2 Scope 1 1.3 Cross References 1 1.4 Effective Date 1 
 
Section 2.  Definitions 1 
2.1 Applicable Law 1 2.2 Closed Block 2 2.3 Individual Policy 2 2.4 Initial Assets 2 2.5 Initial Liabilities 2 2.6 Operating Rules 2 2.7 Reasonable Dividend Expectations 2 2.8 Reinvestment Rate 2 2.9 Tontine 2 
 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 2 
3.1 Objectives of the Closed Block 3 3.2 Policy Inclusion Criteria 3 3.3 Determination of Funding 3 3.4 Funding Assumptions 3 
3.4.1 Reinvestment Rate 3 
3.4.2 Mortality and Morbidity 5 3.4.3 Lapses 5 3.4.4 Commissions and Expenses 5 3.4.5 Taxes 5 3.4.6 Other Factors 5 
3.5 Operating Rules 5 
3.5.1 Insurance Cash Flows 5 3.5.2 Investment Cash Flows 5 3.5.3 Commissions and Expenses 6 3.5.4 Taxes 6 3.5.5 Initial Liabilities 6 
3.6 Closed Block Operation 6 
 
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures 6 
4.1 Reliance on Data Supplied by Others 6 4.2 Reliance on Asset Cash-Flow Projections Supplied by Others 6 
 iii4.3 Actuarial Report and Statem ent of Actuarial Opinion 6 
4.4 Disclosures 7 
 
APPENDIXES 
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 8 
Background 8 
Demutualization Statutes 9 The Role of the Actuary 9 
 
Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure  Draft and Committee Responses 11 
 
 iv           F e b r u a r y  1 9 9 9  
 TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons  Interested in Mutual Life Insurance 
Company Conversions 
 FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 SUBJ:   Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 33 
  This booklet contains the final version of  Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 33, Actuarial  
Responsibilities with Respect to Closed Blocks in Mutual Life Insurance Company Conversions.  
 
 Background
 
 In the past decade, an increasing number of mutu al life insurance companies have converted to 
stock life insurance companies, sometimes including the formation of a mutual holding 
company. Demutualizations present important ac tuarial issues, includi ng the preservation of 
reasonable policyholder dividend expectations and, in a trad itional demutualization, the 
allocation among eligible policyho lders of the compensation due them in exchange for their 
membership rights (i.e., consideration).  This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP) deals with actuarial responsibi lities with respect to 
closed blocks, which have often been used as devices to preserve reasonable policyholder 
dividend expectations. (This ASOP addresses situations in which a closed block is used; it does 
not require that a closed block be  used.) Actuaries are often involved in all aspects of a closed 
block, including advising on the types of policies that should be included , the initial funding, and 
the development of the operating rules; and in reviewing actual operations once a closed block 
has been established.   Drafting Issues
 
 A draft of this standard was exposed for re view and comment in a document dated May 1998, 
with a comment deadline of September 1, 1998. Ei ghteen comment letters were received. The 
Life Committee’s Closed Bloc k Task Force and the committee members reviewed each comment 
carefully and made a number of changes to the exposure draft in response (see appendix 2). 
 The comment that prompted the most discussion wa s one that objected to the approach taken in 
the exposure draft to setting the reinvestment rate  when the investment policy of the closed block 
differed from that underlying the current divide nd scale. The committee made two changes in 
response to this letter.  
 v1. The committee added the following sentences: 
 
Usually, policyholders would not expect that  the company’s investment policy for new 
assets would change as a result of the establ ishment of the closed block. Therefore, 
policyholders’ reasonable dividend expectati ons are most likely to be met if the 
investment policy for new assets to be purchased  with the closed block’s cash flows is the 
same as the investment policy underlying the current dividend scale.  
 
2. The committee replaced a requirement that th e actuary consider any change in investment 
policy with a requirement that the actuary full y disclose the effect of any non-recognition 
of a change in investment policy. 
 The Closed Block Task Force and the Life Committee thank all those who commented on the 
exposure draft. The ASB voted in Ja nuary 1999 to adopt this standard. 
  
Closed Block Task Force 
 
Godfrey Perrott, Chairperson 
   Kenneth M. Beck   Dale S. Hagstrom    Charles Carroll   William C. Koenig    Gary Corbett   
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Lew H. Nathan, Chairperson 
   John W. Brumbach   Stephen G. Hildenbrand    F r a n k  J .  B u c k     W a l t e r  N .  M i l l e r     Marc A. Cagen   Godfrey Perrott    M a r k  F r e e d m a n    T h o m a s  A .  P h i l l i p s     Jane L. Hamrick   Roger K. Wiard-Bauer   
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
David G. Hartman, Chairperson 
   Phillip N. Ben-Zvi   Roland E. King    Heidi R. Dexter   William C. Koenig    Ken W. Hartwell   Alan J. Stonewall    Frank S. Irish    James R. Swenson 
 1ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF  PRACTICE NO. 33 
 
 
ACTUARIAL RESPONSIBILITIES 
WITH RESPECT TO CLOSED BLOCKS  
IN MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE 
COMPANY CONVERSIONS  
 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  
 1.1 Purpose
—The purpose of this standard is to define the responsibi lities of an actuary when 
the actuary is asked to advise  on, review, or opine on a propos ed or existing closed block 
formed in connection with a mutual life insurance company conversion. 
 1.2 Scope
—This standard of practice applies to act uaries who perform professional services 
in connection with the design and operation of a closed block in conjunction with the 
conversion of a mutual life insurance co mpany to a stock life insurance company, 
including conversion to a mutu al holding company structure. 
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4. 
 1.3 Cross References
—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the original ly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date
—This standard will apply to any act uarial work performed or opinions 
issued on or after June 1, 1999. 
  
Section 2.  Definitions
 
 
The definitions below are defined for use in  this actuarial standard of practice. 
 2.1 Applicable Law
—Federal, state, and local statutes , regulations, case law, and other 
binding authority that may govern  the conversion of the subj ect mutual life insurance 
company to a stock life insurance compa ny, including conversion to a mutual holding 
company structure. 
 2 
2.2 Closed Block —A mechanism to preserve (over time) the reasonable dividend 
expectations of policyholders w ith individual life, health, or  annuity policies. A closed 
block comprises a defined, limited group of polic ies and a defined set of assets, and is 
governed by a set of operating rules. All cas h flows arising from the closed block are 
exclusively committed to supporting the policies in the closed block as specified in the 
operating rules. 
 2.3 Individual Policy
—Any policy (or contract) that is defi ned as an individual policy under 
state insurance law or by the terms of the policy. Any certificate issued under any other 
policy that is sold to a passive  trust but is marketed to indi viduals is also defined as an 
individual policy  for purposes of this standard. 
 2.4 Initial Assets
—The assets allocated to a closed bl ock at its inception. The assets of the 
closed block may be either of the following: 
  a. a distinct segment of assets (which may contain either 100% or  a specified 
fraction of each designated asset) associat ed exclusively with the closed block; or 
  b. a defined share of a larger segment of  assets. Such larger segment may also 
contain assets associated with participating business sold after the date of conversion. Such defined share will vary  from time to time according to the 
methodology specified in the operating rules. 
 2.5 Initial Liabilities
—The obligations ascribed to the cl osed block at its inception by the 
operating rules. 
 
2.6 Operating Rules —All portions of the plan of conve rsion that specify the methods and 
procedures for setting up, ma intaining, and monitoring the op erations of a closed block. 
 2.7 Reasonable Dividend Expectations
—The expectations that th e current dividend scale will 
be maintained if the experience underlying the current scale con tinues, and that the 
dividend scale will be ad justed appropriately if the experience changes. 
 2.8 Reinvestment Rate
—The assumed yield rate on assets to be purchased with the closed 
block’s cash flows. 
 2.9 Tontine
—An outcome of a closed block in wh ich relatively few last surviving 
policyholders receive dividends  substantially disproporti onate to those previously 
received by other policyholders  in the same closed block, particularly po licyholders who 
had persisted for a considerable period.  
  
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices
 
 
 3The actuary may be requested to advise on, revi ew, or opine on various aspects of the closed 
block. In doing so, the actuary s hould be guided by the following: 
 3.1 Objectives of the Closed Block
—The objective in establishing the closed block is to 
preserve the reasonable dividend expectations  of each class of policyholders. After the 
closed block is established, th e objective is to manage a ggregate dividends so as to 
exhaust the assets when the last policy terminates, while avoiding the creation of a tontine. 
 3.2 Policy Inclusion Criteria
—Policies included in a closed block should be reasonably 
expected to generate experience-based po licy dividends over which the company has 
significant discretion. Policies chosen for incl usion should be such that the number of 
policies will decrease to zero in a finite time. These policies are usually individual 
policies. Practical considerat ions may result in the in clusion of other policies. 
 3.3 Determination of Funding
—The actuary should ensure that  the initial assets, together 
with the anticipated revenue from the closed block business, are reasonably expected to be just sufficient to permit the closed block to pay all policy benef its, including dividends 
according to the current dividend scale, and othe r items identified in the operating rules, 
if the funding assumptions are realized. These assets should  include all policy loans and 
due and deferred premiums on polic ies in the closed block. It  is customary to assign to 
the closed block the due and accrued inve stment income on the initial assets. 
 
The actuary should be satisfied that the met hods and assumptions us ed to calculate the 
amount of the initial assets are consistent with the operating rules and the assets’ 
characteristics. If the actuary finds that  the operating rules are ambiguous, then the 
actuary should state, in his or her written report, the interpretati on he or she used to 
determine the funding. 
 3.4 Funding Assumptions
—The actuary should select assump tions consistent with the recent 
experience underlying the current dividend scal e for the closed block policies; these 
assumptions are not necessarily the factors used in the dividend formula. The actuary 
should use his or her best estimates of cas h flows from the initial assets and the 
reinvestment rate assumption described in  section 3.4.1. The actuary should review the 
data relevant to an assumption. If the data  are inconclusive, the actuary may include a 
modest provision for uncertainty that is de signed to increase ra ther than reduce the 
amount of initial assets. 
  3.4.1 Reinvestment Rate
—The actuary should choose a re investment rate assumption 
that is directly related to the company’s practice for determining its current dividend scale for business to be placed in  the closed block. Dividend structures 
commonly fall into one of three types: 
   a. Portfolio Rate—If the company uses  a dividend scale based on a portfolio 
rate, then the reinvestment rate should be equal to the portfolio rate that underlies the current dividend scale. 
 4 
  b. Segmented Portfolio Rate—If the company uses a dividend scale based on 
asset segments or an investment generation method to allocate investment income among generations of policie s or among different products, then 
multiple projection segments with different reinvestment rate assumptions are used. The reinvestment rate fo r each projection segment should be 
equal to the segment portf olio rate that underlies the current dividend scale 
for that generation of policies. 
   c. Generational Rate—If the compan y uses a dividend scale that credits 
investment returns to each policyholder based on the investment generations of that policy’s cash flows,  then the reinvestment rate should 
be equal to the investment rate that  underlies the rate being credited on 
current cash flows. 
 
If capital gains and losses have been reflect ed in some way in the investment rate 
underlying the current dividend scale, then the actuary should include those gains 
or losses in a consistent fashion in dete rmining the reinvestment rate assumption. 
   If the investment rate underlying the current dividend scale reflects gains from 
other sources (such as group lines of busin ess or earnings on surplus), then the 
actuary should not incl ude the effect of such gains in setting the reinvestment rate 
assumption, unless the operating rules provide for crediting such gains to the closed block. 
     Usually, policyholders would not expect that the company’s investment policy for 
new assets would change as a result of the establishment of the closed block. 
Therefore, policyholders’ reasonable divide nd expectations are most likely to be 
met if the investment policy for new asse ts to be purchased with the closed 
block’s cash flows is the same as the investment policy underlying the current 
dividend scale. However, if the closed bl ock investment policy is different from 
the investment policy underlying the curre nt dividend scale, the actuary may, 
notwithstanding earlier provisions  of this section, modify  the reinvestment rate 
assumption to reflect the change. If the ch ange in investment policy is not fully 
reflected in the reinvestment rate assump tion, the actuary should disclose this fact 
in his or her opinion. The disclosu re should include the following: 
   a. the extent to which this change in investment policy was not reflected in 
the reinvestment assumption; 
   b. the rationale for having not fully reflected this change; and 
   c. whether future dividend scales ar e expected to be higher or lower as a 
result of having not fully reflected this change. 
 
 5If the plan of conversion does not specify an investment policy for new assets to 
be purchased for the closed block, the act uary should obtain a statement of such 
investment policy from company manageme nt and refer to it in the actuarial 
report and statement of actuari al opinion (see section 4.3). 
  3.4.2 Mortality and Morbidity
—The actuary should select assumptions that are 
consistent with the experience underlying the current dividend scale for the closed block policies.  
  3.4.3 Lapses
—The actuary should choose a lapse as sumption that is consistent with 
company experience. Experience data  antedating public knowledge that the 
company was considering converting are preferable to late r experience data, 
which may have been distorted by the announcement. 
  3.4.4 Commissions and Expenses
—The treatment of commissions and expenses should 
be in accordance with that detailed in  the operating rules (see section 3.5.3). 
  3.4.5 Taxes
—The treatment of taxes should be in accordance with that  detailed in the 
operating rules (see section 3.5.4). 
 
3.4.6 Other Factors —The actuary should take into account the company’s recent 
experience with respect to other relevant  factors, such as  dividend options, 
nonforfeiture options, reinsuranc e, conversions, or riders. 
 3.5 Operating Rules
—The operating rules are an integral pa rt of the plan of conversion of the 
mutual life insurance company. Any actuary  drafting or reviewing the operating rules 
should ensure that the operati ng rules cover all charges and cr edits to the closed block, 
including at least the treatment of insurance cash flows (including re insurance, if any), 
investment cash flows, and the bases for char ging commissions, expe nses, and taxes; and 
that the initial assets and liabilities are defined. 
  3.5.1 Insurance Cash Flows
—The operating rules should se t forth the procedure for 
crediting and charging cash flows related to policy premiums and benefits to the 
closed block. For example, cash premiu ms, cash repayments of policy loans, and 
policy loan interest paid in cash on cl osed block policies would usually be 
credited to the closed block; death, surrende r, and maturity benefits paid in cash, 
policy loans taken in cash, annuity and other income benefits, and dividends paid in cash would usually be charged to the closed block.  
 
3.5.2 Investment Cash Flows
—The operating rules should specify which investment 
earnings or cash flows should be credited  or charged to the closed block. For 
example, cash flows related to the assets allocated to the clos ed block, such as 
dividend and interest payments, and maturities and sales of assets, would usually be credited; brokerage expenses and ot her expenses directly related to the 
acquisition, maintenance, or sale of a clos ed block asset would usually be charged 
to the closed block. 
 6 
 3.5.3 Commissions and Expenses —The operating rules should specify the method for 
calculating future commission and expense charges, if any, to the closed block. 
 
3.5.4 Taxes  —The operating rules should specify th e method for calculating any future 
tax charges to the closed bl ock. Because a closed block is not a separate taxable 
entity, allocation methods will have to  be developed for some tax items. 
 
3.5.5 Initial Liabilities —The operating rules should specify each category of liability, 
and its amount, that will be assigned to th e closed block at its inception. The asset 
valuation reserve (AVR) a nd interest maintenance re serve (IMR) are usually 
excluded from the closed block because they are not cash items. 
 3.6 Closed Block Operation
—When advising a company on the operation of an existing 
closed block, the actuary should recommend a di vidend scale that is consistent with the 
goal of exhausting the assets when the last policy terminates, while avoiding the creation 
of a tontine. When reviewing the operation of  an existing closed block, the actuary should 
determine whether the total amount of dividends is consistent with this goal. In either 
case, the actuary should be mindful of the guidance found in ASOP No. 15, Dividend 
Determination and Illustration for Participa ting Individual Life In surance Policies and 
Annuity Contracts , with respect to the a llocation of dividends am ong classes of policies. 
  
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures
 
 
4.1 Reliance on Data Supplied by Others —The actuary may rely on data supplied by another. 
In doing so, the actuary should di sclose both the fact and the ex tent of such reliance. The 
accuracy and comprehensiveness of data supplie d by others are the responsibility of those 
who supply the data. However, when practicab le, the actuary should review the data for 
reasonableness and consistency. For further gu idance, the actuary is directed to ASOP 
No. 23, Data Quality.  
 4.2 Reliance on Asset Cash-Flow Pr ojections Supplied by Others
—The actuary may rely on 
asset cash-flow projections or other analyses of assets supplied by others—for example, 
projections of real estate or equity assets. In doing so, th e actuary should disclose both 
the fact and the extent of such reliance. The accuracy  and soundness of projections 
supplied by others are the res ponsibility of those who supp ly the projections. However, 
when practicable, the actuary should revi ew the projections for reasonableness and 
consistency. 
 4.3 Actuarial Report and Statement of Actuarial Opinion
—At the time of the establishment 
of a closed block, an actuar y who advises an employer or client concerning the closed 
block’s development or who reviews a closed  block under development on behalf of an 
employer or client should issue a written actuarial report or statement of actuarial opinion concerning the appropriateness of the closed  block arrangements, unless another actuary 
advising the same entity is issuing such a report or statement. Each actuarial report or 
 7statement of actuarial opinion usually should express an opinion concerning the classes of 
policies to be included in a closed block, th e appropriateness of the operating rules of the 
closed block, and the sufficiency of the funding  of the closed block, all in light of the 
objective of the closed block. 
 
An actuary who advises an empl oyer or client on the operation of a closed block that is 
already in existence, or reviews a closed block already in existe nce on behalf of an 
employer or client, should issue a written actu arial report or statement of actuarial 
opinion concerning the operations of the clos ed block, unless another actuary advising 
the same entity is issuing such a report or st atement. Any such report or statement should 
address the subject described in  section 3.6, and may also discuss other aspects of closed 
block operations. 
 
An actuary who is testifying about a propos ed or actual closed block should consult 
ASOP No. 17, Expert Testimony by Actuaries,  for guidance on expert testimony. 
 4.4  Disclosures
—The actuary should include the followi ng, as applicable, in the actuarial 
report or statement of actuarial opinion: 
 
a.  the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications , section 4.2, if any 
material assumption or method was pres cribed by applicable law (statutes, 
regulations, and other lega lly binding authority); 
 
b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; and 
 
c. the disclosure in ASOP  No. 41, section 4.4, if, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has othe rwise deviated materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP. 
   
 8Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 
Note:   This appendix is provided fo r informational purposes, but is not part of the standard of 
practice. 
 
 
Background   
 
In the early 1980s, a few large mutual life in surance companies evin ced an interest in 
demutualization. The Society of Actuaries (S OA) responded to this interest in 1984 by 
appointing a task force on mutual life insurance company conversion with the following charge:  
“To examine the actuarial issues involved in converting a mutual life insurance company to a 
stock form of ownership, and to prod uce a record of its examination.” 
 At that time there had been relatively few convers ions of mutual insuranc e companies, and most 
of these had been conversions of property and ca sualty companies. The few mutual life insurance 
company conversions had involve d relatively small companie s or immediate acquisition by 
another company; many of the issues that a large, multi-line mutual life insurance company 
would encounter in a conversion to an independent stock life in surance company were new. To 
the extent that states had laws permitting such conversions, these laws had been derived from, or were identical to, laws applicab le to conversions of property a nd casualty companies. There was 
relatively little actuaria l literature on the subject. 
 The “Report of the Task Force on Mutual Life  Insurance Company Conversion,” completed in 
July 1987 by the SOA (see Transactions  39 (1988):  295–391), covered what the task force 
considered to be the three principal actuaria l aspects of a mutual life insurance company 
conversion:  how to maintain policyholders’ reasonable dividend expectations; how to determine 
the aggregate amount of compensa tion due to policyholders in exchange for their membership 
rights; and how to allocate this aggregat e amount of compensation among participating 
policyholders.  The report stated that the convers ion plan should be designed to a ssure policyholders that their 
reasonable dividend expectations (i .e., that the current dividend s cale would continue if current 
experience continued) would be met. Otherwise,  policyholders would be required, when voting 
on the conversion plan, to weigh the compensa tion offered for the cancellation of their 
membership rights against the possi bility of reduced dividends. Th e SOA task force considered a 
number of methods of maintain ing policyholders’ dividend expect ations and concluded that the 
closed block approach was the most pr omising for most individual coverages. 
 The SOA task force recognized that a closed bloc k may not be appropriate or effective for all 
lines of business and, thus, that decisions must be made as to the classes of business to be 
 9included in a closed block. To th e extent that these decisions ar e not preempted or prescribed by 
statute, the task force suggested the following criteria:  1. If, for a class of polic ies, there is an expectation of substantial policy dividends and the 
company has significant discre tion as to whether those divi dends are paid and in what 
amounts, the class should probably be included in the closed block. 
 2. If the dividend structure for a class of polic ies is based more on broad averaging of costs 
than on policy-by-policy experience rating, the class should probably be included in the 
closed block. Policies that are experience rated largely on an i ndividual basis should 
probably not be included. 
 3. Classes of policies included in  the closed block should be ex pected to diminish in size 
with the passage of time and, ev entually, to disappear. Any cl ass of policies not expected 
to diminish over time proba bly should not be included. 
  
Demutualization Statutes 
 
 
Many states enacted legislation governing the co nditions under which life insurance companies 
can convert to the stock form, bot h before and after the task force’s report. For example, the New 
York statute requires that the plan of conversi on be “fair and equitabl e to the policyholders.” 
More particularly, the New York st atute requires that participating business that is in force on the 
effective date of the conversion must be operate d by the reorganized insu rer as a closed block, 
for policyholder dividend purposes only. Some or  all classes of group po licies and contracts may 
be excluded from the closed block. 
 
The past few years have seen the advent of the mutual holding company form of conversion. 
With this form, just as with a traditional de mutualization, a mutual lif e insurance company is 
converted to the stock form of ownership. U ltimately, if not immediatel y, the converted life 
insurance company may have owne rs other than policyholders, and the policyholders’ reasonable 
dividend expectations will need protection.  To date, all conversions that have involved outside (non-policyholder) shareholders, whether 
occasioned by traditional demutualization or by conversion to a mutual holding company 
structure, have, with minor exceptions, resulted in the formation of a closed block. Generally, 
only dividend-paying participati ng individual policies (including so me group policies that were 
marketed and administered as individual) have been included within the closed block. Other 
protective mechanisms have sometimes been used for non-dividend–paying policies that con-
tained some form of discretionary benefit.   
The Role of the Actuary 
 
 The New York statute requires that “one or more qualified and disinterested actuaries,” 
appointed by the superintendent , certify “the reasonableness a nd sufficiency” of the assets 
 10initially allocated to the closed block. This  certification must “be made in accordance with 
professional standards and pract ices generally accepted by the actuarial profession and such 
other factors as such actuary in his profe ssional judgment believ es are reasonable and 
appropriate.” Some states, Illinois being an example, require that an opinion of the actuary as to 
the sufficiency of the initial  asset allocation “be based on methods of analysis deemed 
appropriate for those purposes by the Actuarial Standards Board.” 
 Actuaries are often involved in al l aspects of a closed block, advi sing on the selection of policies 
to be included, the initial f unding, and the operating rules, an d, subsequently, reviewing the 
operation. Actuaries have acted in  at least three roles:  as the company’s own actuaries; as 
independent consulting actuarie s who may both advise the comp any and provide independent 
opinions to management, the board of directors, policyholders, and to the state regarding certain 
aspects of the closed block; a nd as independent actuaries retain ed by a supervisory authority for 
advice and to provide one or more opinions  on certain aspects of the closed block. 
 This ASOP reflects what is considered good practic e used in the establishm ent of closed blocks 
up until this time. The unique circumstances a nd characteristics of each mutual company, 
however, make it impossible to state with conf idence that the goal of protecting policyholders’ 
reasonable dividend expectations can be met, in all future transactions, without deviating from 
this standard in some way as yet unforeseen. The actuary is best qualified,  of all participating 
professionals, to assess and analyze the particul ar circumstances and operating philosophies of 
the mutual company, as demonstrated over its hi story, in determining what actually constitutes 
“reasonable dividend expectations” a nd to recommend fund ing to that end. 
 11Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the Exposure Draft 
and Committee Responses  
 
 
The exposure draft of the proposed standard wa s circulated for review in May 1998, with a 
comment deadline of September 1, 1998. Eighteen lett ers of comment were received. The Closed 
Block Task Force and the Life  Committee carefully reviewed each comment and made a number 
of changes in response. Summari zed below are the significant issu es and questions contained in 
the comment letters, printed in roman. The committee’s responses appear in boldface . 
  General Comments
 
 Several comment letters did not apply to any part icular part of the exposure draft. One letter 
approved of the proposed actuarial standard of  practice (ASOP); anothe r letter disapproved of 
the proposed ASOP and of the concept of closed bl ocks. One letter suggested that a closed block 
should be funded with assets equa l to liabilities and profit transfers made periodically. Another 
letter requested guidanc e on how to avoid a tontine. Anothe r letter suggested that guidance 
should be given on reinsurance that should be se cured by the closed block to avoid mortality 
fluctuations.  The committee did not make any change  to the ASOP as a result of these 
letters.  
 
One letter requested guidance on spreading deviations of actual from expected experience over 
several years. The committee felt that this question was beyond the scope of this ASOP.  
 
 Transmittal Memorandum
 
 In the exposure draft’s transmittal memorandum, the committee drew its readers’ attention to 
three provisions in particular :  section 3.4, Funding Assumpti ons; section 3.4.1, Reinvestment 
Rate Assumption; and section 3.4.5, Taxes. Please see those sectio ns, below, for discussion of 
any pertinent readers’ comments and committee responses.  Two commentators objected to the term full demutualization , which appeared elsewhere in the 
transmittal memorandum. The committee changed the term to traditional demutualization . 
Three letters suggested rec ognizing protection methods ot her than closed blocks. The committee 
acknowledges that there are other valid method s, but believes them to be beyond the scope 
of this ASOP.  
 
     
 12Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, and Effective Date  
 Section 1.3, Effective Date—One commentator suggested that section 1.3 should encourage 
earlier implementation of the ASOP. The committee changed the effe ctive date at the ASB’s 
direction.  
 
 Section 2.  Definitions
 
 Five commentators requested a definition of reasonable dividend expectations . The committee 
added such a definition (see section 2.7).  One letter commented on the definition of individual 
policy  used; another letter re quested a definition of group policy ; a third suggested adding a 
definition of initial liabilities . The committee edited the definition of individual policy  (see 
section 2.3) slightly; de cided not to define group policy ; and added a definition of initial 
liabilities  (see section 2.5).  
 
 Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices
 
 Section 3.2, Policy Inclusion Criter ia—One commentator suggested th at universal life insurance 
policies should be included in closed blocks and that the guidance on what policies should be 
included should be expanded. Severa l letters requested more examples. The committee did not 
agree that more examples would clarify the pr oposed standard. The committee retained 
section 3.2 as written.  
 
Section 3.3, Determination of Funding—One lett er suggested including due and accrued 
investment income in section 3.3. The committee edited section 3.3 to include such income. 
Two letters suggested editori al changes to section 3.3. Some of the suggested editorial changes 
appear in the revised text.  
 
Section 3.4, Funding Assumptions—In the expos ure draft’s transmittal memorandum, the 
committee asked for comment on this section as follows:  
Section 3.4, Funding Assumptions, states that th e assumptions should be consistent with 
the recent experience underlying the current dividend scale. An alternative position could 
be that the assumptions should be consiste nt with the experience underlying the dividend 
scale at the last time it was approved by th e board of directors, which may have been 
several years ago. The Life Committee beli eves that the approach set forth in the 
exposure draft is preferable, but welcomes comments.  
 
No comment letters directed to this point w ere received and the committee believes that the 
approach taken by the standard is appropriate.  
 
One letter suggested that secti on 3.4 specifically refer to the possible use by a closed block of a 
slice of a larger portfolio. Language has been added to the definition of initial assets  (see 
section 2.4) to accommodate this suggestion.  
 13 
Several letters suggested  editorial changes. The committee adopted some  suggested changes to 
improve clarity.  
 
Section 3.4.1, Reinvestment Rate Assumption (now  titled Reinvestment Rate)—In the exposure 
draft’s transmittal memorandum, the committee asked a specific question about this section as 
follows:  
Section 3.4.1, Reinvestment Rate Assumpti on, provides for an adjustment to the 
reinvestment rate assumption if the investment policy for assets to be purchased for the closed block is different from the investme nt policy underlying the current dividend scale 
(i.e., the dividend scale in effect immediatel y prior to the establishment of the closed 
block). This statement implies that if the clos ed-block’s cash flows are to be invested in 
assets significantly different, in type or maturity pattern, from assets underlying the 
current dividend scale, the reinvestment ra te should be modified. For example, the 
investment policy might state that closed-b lock investments are not to include a 
substantial common stock component that underl ies the current scale, or that closed-
block assets are to be invested in debt inst ruments of significantly shorter maturities than 
those underlying the current scale. Should the ASOP provide more guidance in this area?  
 
One comment letter objected to the approach taken in the exposure draft to setting the 
reinvestment rate when the investment policy of  the closed block differed from that underlying 
the current dividend scale. The committee made two changes in response to this letter: 
 
1. The committee added the following sentences:  
Usually, policyholders would not expect that  the company’s investment policy for new 
assets would change as a result of the est ablishment of the closed block. Therefore, 
policyholders’ reasonable dividend expectat ions are most likely to be met if the 
investment policy for new assets to be purcha sed with the closed block’s cash flows is 
the same as the investment policy unde rlying the current dividend scale.  
 
2. The committee replaced a re quirement that the actuar y consider any change in 
investment policy with a requirement that the actuary fully disclose the effect of any 
non-recognition of a change in investment policy.  
 
One letter suggested that where the experience ha d changed dramatically since the dividend scale 
was set, but before the closed block was funded, current experience, rath er than the experience 
underlying the dividend scale, should be used. The committee found this to be inconsistent 
with the purpose and design of a closed block and made no change.  
 
Section 3.4.2, Mortality and Morbidity—One letter indicated that the commentator thought that 
section 3.4.2 referred to the di vidend mortality rather than to the mortality underlying the 
dividend scale.  The committee believes th at the meaning is clear.  
 
 14Section 3.4.4, Commissions and Expe nses—One letter suggested that  expenses should always be 
funded by the closed block. This is  contrary to cu rrent practice. The committee made no 
change.  
 
Section 3.4.5, Taxes—The committee had explicitly asked for comment on this section in the exposure draft’s transmittal memorandum as follows:  
Section 3.4.5, Taxes, does not discuss the trea tment of the IRC Section 809 so-called 
equity tax on mutual insurance companies. Historically, this ta x (even if it is still 
payable) has not been charged to the closed  block in the operati ng rules and therefore 
has been ignored in the funding calculations. 
 
Some dividend scales contain e ither an implicit or explicit charge to reflect the equity 
tax. The Life Committee considered whethe r the operating rules should specify making 
this charge to the closed block under th e tax allocation proced ures, provided the 
company was still subject to the equity tax. If  the company were not subject to the equity 
tax, this charge would not be allocated to the closed block. Under this approach (which 
has not to our knowledge been followed in  any transaction), the charge would be 
assumed in the closed-block funding calculations  so that if and when the company were 
no longer subject to the equity tax, the clos ed-block policies would be nefit to the extent 
they had been previously charged. The ASB Life Committee believes that the approach set forth in the exposure draft is preferable, but welcomes comments.  
 
No letters on this point were received and th e committee believes that the approach taken 
in the ASOP is appropriate.  
 
A number of commentators made editorial sugges tions, particularly with  respect to section 3.4, 
Funding Assumptions, and section 3.5, Operating Rules. The committee considered all 
editorial suggestions and adopted a number of them.  
 
The Closed Block Task Force and the Life Committee of the ASB thank everyone who took the 
time and made the effort to submit comments. 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 10  
 
 
 
 
U.S. GAAP  for Long -Duration Life,  
Annuity, and Health Products  
 
 
 
Revised Edition  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developed by the  
 Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 10 of the  
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board  
 
Adopted by the  
Actuarial Standards Board  
December 2022  
 
Doc. No. 207 

ASOP No. 10—Doc. No. 207 
 ii  
Transmittal Memorandum iv 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  1 
1.1 Purpose  1 
1.2 Scope  1 
1.3 Cross References  1 
1.4 Effective Date  2 
 
Section 2.  Definitions  2 
2.1 Best-Estimate Assumption  2 
2.2 Cohort  2 
2.3 Costs  2 
2.4 Deferred Policy Acquisition Cost (DPAC)  2 
2.5 Deferred Sales Inducements (DSI)  2 
2.6 GAAP Net Premiums  2 
2.7 Gross Premiums  2 
2.8 Liability for Future Policy Benefits  2 
2.9 Lock -In 2 
2.10  Market -Estimate Assumption  2 
2.11  Market Risk Benefit  2 
2.12  Net GAAP Liability  3 
2.13  Policy Benefit Liability  3 
2.14  Premium Deficiency  3 
2.15  Risk of Adverse Deviation 3 
2.16  Value of Business Acquired (VOBA)  3 
 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices  3 
3.1 Overview  3 
3.2 Classification of Contracts, Features, and Benefits  3 
3.3 Types of Assumptions  4 
3.3.1  Best-Estimate Assumptions  4 
3.3.2  Market -Estimate Assumptions  4 
3.3.2.1  Direct Observation  4 
3.3.2.2  Inference  5 
3.3.2.3  Relevant Information 5 
3.3.2.4  Anticipated Experience  5 
3.4 Discount Rate Assumptions  5 
3.5 Provision for Risk of Adverse Deviation 6 
3.5.1  Degree of Risk  6 
3.5.2  Relationship to Anticipated Experience  6 
3.5.3  Effect of Provi sion 6 
3.6 Risk Adjustment  6 
3.7 Internal Consistency  6 
ASOP No. 10—Doc. No. 207 
 iii 3.8 Assumptions Selected by Another Party  7 
3.9 Methods  7 
3.10  Financial Statement Disclosures  7 
3.11  Premium Deficiency Testing  8 
3.12  Recognition of Premiums  8 
3.13  Simplifications and Approximatio ns 8 
3.14  Reliance on Others for Data, Projections, Models, and Supporting Analysis  8 
3.15  Reliance on Another Actuary  8 
3.16  Reliance on Expertise of Others  8 
3.17  Documentation  9 
 
Section 4.  Communications and Disclosures  9 
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report  9 
4.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report  10 
4.3 Confidential Information  10 
 
APPENDIXES  
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices  11 
Background  11 
Current Practices  12 
 
Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses  13 
           
 
 
ASOP No. 10—Doc. No. 207 
 iv  December 2022  
 
TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Governed by the Standards of Practice of 
the Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons Interested in U.S. GAAP  for 
Long-Duration Life, Annuity, and Health Products  
 
FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB)  
 
SUBJ:   Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 10  
 
This document contains the revision of ASOP No. 10, now titled U.S. GAAP for Long- Duration 
Life, Annuity, and Health Products .  
 
History of the Standard  
 
ASOP No. 10 was originally adopted by the ASB in 1989. The 1989 standard was developed by 
the American Academy  of Actuaries (Academy) Committee on Life Insurance Financial 
Reporting for the Life Committee of the ASB. In 1992, ASOP No. 10 was expanded to 
incorporate certain Financial Reporting Recommendations. In 2000, it was revised to reflect 
developments in gene rally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) since 1992. 
 
Since 2000, several American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Statements of Position 
pertinent to insurance contract accounting have been issued. In addition, certain features of 
insurance contracts are now considered under GAAP to be embedded derivatives. These 
features are accounted for at fair value, which has been more specifically defined. As a result of 
these developments, the ASB authorized an update to ASOP No. 10.  
 
The 2011 revision removed interpretations of GAAP literature and focused the standard on 
those activities for which actuaries are most directly responsible. This resulted in the deletion of 
the “Special Situations” and “Lock -In/Adjustment” sections in the previous version of ASOP 
No. 10. The ASB believes these sections included interpretations of authoritative GAAP 
guidance, which is beyond the scope of the actuary’s role. Actuaries can refer to other relevant 
literature for further information on topics that were deleted.   
 
In 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued amended guidance in 
Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2018–12, Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for 
Long- Duration Contracts . ASU 2018–12 makes significant changes to how insurers acc ount for 
and make financial disclosures relating to long- duration contracts. These accounting changes 
include periodic review and potential updates to assumptions and discount rates used to 
calculate liabilities for future policyholder benefits, a new clas sification called market risk 
benefits, a simplification of the deferred acquisition cost amortization methodology, and a 
significant expansion of required disclosures. ASU 2018–12 amended guidance on premium 
deficiency testing and provisions for  risk of  adverse deviation for certain long- duration 
contracts. The mandatory implementation date was subsequently delayed and also allowed for a 
later implementation date for certain smaller companies and non -SEC filers as defined by 
ASOP No. 10—Doc. No. 207 
 v FASB. This will give rise to mu ltiple accounting standards being applicable at the same time. 
Because of these changes, the ASB authorized another update to ASOP No. 10.  
 
This revision adds guidance reflecting ASU 2018 –12 while retaining relevant existing guidance 
for GAAP because the ASB recognizes that individual company adoption dates of ASU 2018–
12 will vary.  
 
Exposure Draft  
 
The exposure draft was approved in April 2022 with a comment deadline of June 30, 2022. 
Three comment letters were received and considered in making changes t hat were reflected in 
the final ASOP.  
 
Notable Changes from the Exposure Draft  
 
Notable changes made in this final ASOP are summarized below. Additional changes were 
made to improve readability, clarity, or consistency. 
 
1.  Several definitions were revis ed.  
 
2.    Sections 3.1 and 3.2 were revised to require that the actuary be familiar with relevant 
company accounting policies, rather than operating policies. 
 
3. Section 3.2 was revised to provide guidance when the actuary is contributing to the 
classif ication of contracts, features, and benefits.  
 
4.  Section 3.9 was revised to cover a range of circumstances.  
 
5.  Section 3.12 was modified to better align with the actuary’s responsibilities with respect 
to revenue recognition.  
 
Notable Changes from the Existing ASOP  
 
A cumulative summary of notable changes from the existing standard are summarized below. 
Notable changes do not include changes made to improve readability, clarity, or consistency.  
 
1. The title, purpose, and scope of the ASOP now encompass long- duration life, annuity, 
and health products. The scope was also clarified to include the review of GAAP 
financial statements.  
 
2. Definitions of “cohort,” “liability for future policy benefits,” and “market risk benefit” 
were add ed to section 2, and several definitions were revised.  
 
3. Section 3.1 was revised to encompass the review of methods and assumptions and to 
clarify the role of the actuary in developing qualitative and quantitative disclosures 
related to financial statements.  
ASOP No. 10—Doc. No. 207 
 vi  
4. Section 3.2 was revised to provide guidance when the actuary is contributing to the 
classification of contracts, features, and benefits.  
 
5. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 were also revised to require that the actuary be familiar with 
relevant company accounting policies  
 
6. The statement regarding periodically reviewed and updated assumptions versus locked-
in assumptions was added to section 3.3.1 (Best -Estimate Assumptions) for clarity.  
 
7. In section 3.3.2, market risk benefits were added to the examples of items that are 
measured at fair value.  
 
8. Section 3.4 was added to address discount rate assumptions.  
 
9. Section 3.6 was added to provide guidance on the risk adjustment. 
 
10. Section 3.7 was updated to address internal consistency by cohort and to extend the 
concept of consistency to risk adjustment. 
 
11. Section 3.8 was added to provide guidance when assumptions are selected by another 
party. 
 
12. Updated examples of classifications were added to section 3. 9(b).  
 
13. Section 3.10 was added to address financial statement disclosures.  
 
14. Section 3.12 was modified to better align with the actuary’s responsibilities with respect 
to revenue recognition.  
 
15. New guidance was added on reliance on others for data, projections, models, and 
supporting analysis; reliance on another actuary; and reliance on expertise of others in 
sections 3.14, 3.15, and 3.16. 
 
16. Guidance on documentation was expanded in section 3.17.  
 
17. Disclosure requirements in section 4 were restructured and expanded.  
 
 
The AS B voted in December 2022 to adopt this standard.  
ASOP No. 10—Doc. No. 207 
 vii Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 10 
 
Lisa S. Kuklinski, Chairperson  
William C. Hines    Michael J. Park  
Timothy M. Koenig   James T. Ward  
Paul R. Lavallee    Shaowei Yang  
Jennifer I. Nam  
      
      
Life Committee of the ASB  
 
Linda M. Lankowski, Chairperson  
Janice A. Duff    Matthew A. Monson  
Lisa S. Kuklinski   Gabriel Schiminovich  
Donna C. Megregian   Jeremy Starr  
      
 
Actuarial Standards Board  
 
Darrell D. Knapp, Chairperson  
Elizabeth K. Brill   David E. Neve  
Robert M. Damler   Christopher F. Noble  
Kevin M. Dyke   Judy K. Stromback 
Laura A. Hanson   Patrick B. Woods  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets standards for appropriate actuarial practice  
in the United States through the development and promulgation of Actuarial Standards of 
Practice (ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the proc edures an actuary should follow when 
performing actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose when 
communicating the results of those services.
 
1 
  
  
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE NO. 10  
 
 
U.S. GAAP  FOR LONG -DURATION  LIFE, ANNUIT Y, AND HEALTH 
PRODUCTS  
 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  
 
1.1 Purpose —This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP  or standard) provides guidance to 
actuaries when performing actuarial services related to  the preparation  or review  of 
insurance company financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted 
accounting principles (GAAP)  for long- duration life, annuity, or health products. 
 
1.2 Scope —This standard applies to actuaries when performing actuarial services related to 
the preparation or review of insurance company financial statements  in accordance with 
GAAP for long- duration life, annuity, or health products .  
 
The actuary should comply with this standard except to the extent it may conflict with 
applicable law (statutes, regulations, and other legally binding authority) or authoritative  
GAAP guidance (su ch as Accounting Standards Codification [ASC], Staff Accounting 
Bulletins issued by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and other guidance 
issued by authoritative bodies).  
 
If the actuary is performing actuarial services that involve the review o f insurance company 
financial statements in accordance with GAAP for long -duration life, annuity, or health 
products, the actuary should use the guidance in section 3 to the extent practicable.  
 
If a conflict exists between this standard and applicable law , the actuary should comply 
with applicable law.  If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in 
order to comply with applicable law, authoritative GAAP guidance, or for any other reason  
the actuary deems appropriate, the actuary should refer to s ection 4 .  
 
1.3 Cross References —When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as they may be am ended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the originally referenced document, the actuary should 
follow  the guidance in this standard to the extent it is  applicable and appropriate.  
 
 
2 
 1.4 Effective Date—This standard is  effective for actuarial services related to the preparation 
or review of insurance company GAAP financial statements  applicable to fiscal periods 
ending on or after May 1, 2023.  
 
 
Section 2. Definitions   
 
The terms below are defined for use in this standard and appear in bold throughout the ASOP.  
They are intended to conform with authoritative  GAAP guidance, where applicable.  
 
2.1 Best-Estimate Assumption —An assumption that reflects anticipated experience with no 
provision for risk  of adverse deviation .  
 
2.2 Cohort —A g rouping of insurance contracts or policies for the purpose of measuring the 
liability for future  policy benefits , DPAC, and any other related balance s.  
 
2.3 Costs —All benefit payments and expenses associated with issuing, maintaining (to the 
extent allow able by  authoritative GAAP guidance), and settling a company’s insurance 
policies and contracts, with no provision for profit. 
 
2.4 Deferred Policy Acquisition Cost  (DPAC) —An asset representing the unamortized portion 
of capitalized policy acquisition expenses. 
 
2.5 Deferred Sales Inducements (DSI) —An asset representing the unamortized portion of 
capitalized sales inducements  to policyholders . 
 
2.6 GAAP Net Premium s—The portion of gross premiums  that provides for certain costs , as 
defined by authoritative GAAP guidance.  
 
2.7 Gross Premium s—Amounts contractually required to be paid or anticipated to be 
contributed by the policyholder. 
2.8 Liability for Future Policy Benefits —An accrued obligation to policyholders that relates 
to insured events, such as death or disability , measured as the present value of future 
policy benefits minus the present value of future  GAAP  net premiums .  
2.9 Lock -In—A requirement to continue using original basis assumptions  (as set at issue, 
acquisition, or prior redetermination).  
   
2.10 Market -Estimate Assumption—An assumption that represents what a typical market 
partic ipant would use in assessing the amount the participant would pay to acquire a given 
asset, or the amount the participant would require to assume a given liability ( also known 
as  an  “exit market” price).  
 
2.11 Market Risk Benefit —A contract or contract feature in a long -duration contract issued by 
an insurance entity that both protects the contract holder from other -than-nominal capital 
 
3 
 market risk and exposes the insurance entity to other -than-nominal capital marke t risk  by 
providing a benefit in excess of account value . 
 
2.12 Net GAAP Liability —The GAAP policy benefit liability  less any associated  intangible 
balances, such as  DPAC, VOBA, and DSI . 
 
2.13 Policy Benefit Liability —An accrued obligation to policyholders that relates to the 
payment of future costs  (including unpaid claim reserves for incurred and future claims ) 
and amounts accrued for unearned revenue .  
 
2.14 Premium Deficiency —A condition that exists when the  sum of the  net GAAP liability  and 
the present value of future gross premiums  is less than the present value of future benefits 
and expenses using current best -estimate assumpti ons.  
 
2.15 Risk of Adverse Deviation—The risk that actual experience may differ from best-estimate 
assumptions  in a manner that produces costs  higher than assumed or revenues less than 
assumed.  
 
2.16 Value of Business Acquired (VOBA) —The balance that arises in the application of GAAP 
purchase accounting as the difference between the reported value and the fair value of 
insurance contract liabilities, or comparable amounts determined in purchased insurance 
business combinations. 
 
 
Section 3. Analy sis of Issues and Recommended Practices  
 
3.1 Overview —The principles and methodologies used in determining financial statement 
amounts are generally prescribed by author itative GAAP guidance. While  insurance 
company GAAP financial statements are the responsibility of management, a ctuaries 
frequently participate in the processes of developing specific techniques for application of 
GAAP methods and selecting or considering assumptions  used in the preparation of 
insurance company  financial statements . Actuaries also frequently participate in 
developing both quantitative and qualitative disclosures related to financial statements , as 
required under GAAP . When participating  in these activities, the actuary  should be familiar 
with relevant company accounting policies as well as relevant accounting and actuarial 
literature.  
 
Because GAAP financial statements are typically audited by internal and external auditors, 
the actuary should also refer to ASOP No . 21, Responding to or Assisting Auditors or 
Examiners in Connection with Financial Audits, Financial Reviews, and Financial 
Examinations . 
 
3.2 Classification of Contracts , Features , and Benefits —The actuary should confirm that each 
relevant contract , contract feature, and contract benefit  has been classified  under GAAP.  
When contributing to accounting classification , the actuary should take into account a ll 
relevant levels of classification (for example, insurance or  investment , market risk 
 
4 
 benefit , embedded derivative) , applicable law, authoritative GAAP guidance, and the 
company’s accounting policies.  
 
3.3 Types of Assumptions —Two types of assumptions  are used in the preparation of GAAP 
financial statements: best -estimate assumptions  and market -estimate assumptions . The 
type of assumption used and whether  the assumption includes  any provisions  for risk or 
uncertainty are dictated by the particular circumstances  and applicable accounting 
guidance. The actuary should confirm that the proper type of assumption is used. 
 
The actuary should ide ntify which best -estimate assumptions  are periodically reviewed 
and updated, and which assumptions  are subject to lock -in.  
 
3.3.1 Best-Estimate Assumptions —Certain GAAP financial statement items (for 
example, liability for  future policy benefits ) are measured using best -estimate 
assumptions . The actuary should choose  assumptions  that reflect management’s 
assessment of emerging experience without provisions for risk or unc ertainty. 
Where there is no emerging experience, the actuary should choose assumptions  that 
reflect management’s expectations of how experience will emerge.  
    
  Best-estimate assumptions  may be established as the mode, mean, or median of a 
probability distribution. Other interpretations of best estimate are possible. The 
actuary should use actuarial judgment to determine which interpretation of best -
estimate is appropriate  for the circumstances  and consistent with the applicable 
authoritative GAAP guidance.  
 
When  advising management on the selection of best -estimate assumptions , the 
actuary should take into account  items such as  the character istics and magnitude of 
the company’s business ; the maturity of the company and its rate of growth;  the 
prior experience of the company and the trends in that experience ; and medical, 
economic, social, and technological developments that might affect future 
experience. The actuary ’s advice should take into account the company’s  actual 
recent experience data, if, in the actuary’s judgment, it is relevant and credible.  
 
The actuary should also consider supplementing available company- specific data 
with relevant industry data or data fr om other similarly situated companies. The 
actuary should refer to ASOP  No. 23, Data Quality , and ASOP No. 25, Credibility  
Procedures .  
 
3.3.2 Market -Estimate Assumptions —Certain  GAAP  financial statement items (for 
example, derivatives , embedded derivatives , and market risk benefits ) are 
measured at fair value. When the fair value of an item is not readily observable in 
the marketplace, the actuary should use market -estimate assumption s to 
determine a value for such items.  
 
3.3.2.1 Direct Observation —The actuary should use market -estimate 
assumptions  that reflect reliable market information to the extent 
reasonably observable. Some assumptions  (for example, the market’s 
 
5 
 assessment of future interest rates) may be directly observable in 
published sources that are commonly quoted for market -based 
information. The general acceptance of such information by the market 
may serve to enhance the actuar y’s comfort with its reliability. The 
actuary should consider using multiple sources of information, when 
available, to help validate the reliability of the information.   
 
3.3.2.2 Infer ence— When market  information is not direct ly observable, the 
actuary should use market -estimate assumptions  inferred from other 
observable information. Such information may be obtained by observing 
market transactions that imply the market’s assessment of the assumption. 
For example, when making a  market -estimate assumption  for the 
volatility of one -year returns on a stock market index, the actuary may be 
able to deduce that assumption from observing the price at which options 
on that index are trading.  
 
3.3.2.3 Relevant Information —Often, the actuary will not be able to observe 
market transactions that inc orporate  some or all of  the assumptions  that 
are needed. In such situations, the actuary should use available observable 
information that may have relevance in determining market participants’ 
assessment of the assumption that is required. For example, an actuary 
may have no means of directly observing the market’s assessment of 
mortality for a specific group of lives. However, industry mortality data 
or mortality assumptions  used by market participants in pricing 
transactions involving similar sets of lives may be observable. The actuary 
may co nsider this information to be relevant in establishing an assumption  
even though the i nformation is not directly observable for the specific 
group of lives under consideration.  
 
3.3.2.4 Anticipated Experience —When there is insufficient observable 
information, the actuary may choose a market -estimate assumption  
based on the actuary’s  expectations for that assumption. Such 
assumptions  should reflect market -observable information to the extent 
possible. When incorpor ating anticipated experience assumptions, the 
actuary should determine whether a market participant would require a 
margin to compensate for uncertainty. If so, the actuary should include an 
estimate of that margin based on the considerations discussed in sections 
3.3.2.1 through 3.3.2.3. 
 
3.4 Discount Rate Assumptions —When determining the discount rate assumptions  for certain 
long- duration contracts (for example, upper -medium -grade fixed -income instrument yield 
used in calculating  the liability for future policy benefits ), the actuary should apply the 
principles of authoritative GAAP guidance and the guidance from this standard .  
 
Where the actuary has limited or no observable market inputs to determine the discount 
rate assumptions , the actuary may need to extrapolat e or interpolat e. In such situations, the 
 
6 
 actuary should refer to applicable sections  of authoritative GAAP guidance o n fair value 
measurement (ASC 820) and section 3.3.2 of this standard . 
 
3.5 Provision for Risk of Adverse Deviation— In certain instances , GAAP re quires a provision 
for the risk of adverse deviation  in assumptions .  
 
 3.5.1 Degree of Risk —When determining a provision for risk of  adverse deviation , the 
actuary should take into account  the following:  
 
a. the degree of risk and uncertainty in that assumption in total and at each 
future duration;  
 
b. any policy features that reduce risk  to the company, such as indeterminate 
premiums or dividends ; and  
 
c. the magnitude and frequency of fluctuations in relevant historical 
experience, if available.  
 
For assumptions  that are relatively insignificant, the actuary may decide to add little 
or no provision for risk of adverse deviation . 
 
 3.5.2 Relationship to An ticipated Experience—When  determining assumptions  that 
include a provision for the risk of  adverse deviation , the actuary should take into 
account  whether such assumptions  bear a reasonable relationship to the anticipated 
experience.  
 
 3.5.3 Effect of Provision —The  provision for risk of  adverse deviation  should be such 
that the net GAAP liability  is increased. If the direction of the effect of including 
a provision for risk of adverse deviation  in an assumption is not clear, the actuary 
should attempt to determine the nature of a provision for risk of adverse deviation  
that is appropriate. If the actuary is unable to determine the directional effect, then 
the actuary need not include a provision for risk of adverse deviation  in that 
assumption. The actuary should establish  the individual  provisions for risk of 
adverse deviation  at a level that provides for an app ropriate amount of risk of 
adverse deviation  in aggregate.  
 
3.6 Risk Adjustment —In certain instances , GAAP re quires a risk adjustment (also referred to 
as risk margin or risk premium) in the fair value calculation. The risk adjustment is not a 
provision for risk of adverse deviation ; rather, it represents the additional amount that a 
market participant would dema nd as compensation for bearing uncertainty in the cash 
flows. The actuary should use professional judgment when applying the risk adjustment. 
 
3.7 Internal Consistency— When  advising management on the selection of assumptions , the 
actuary should identify assumptions  that, when taken together, reflect all pertinent areas of 
expected future experience relevant to the product, line of business, block of business, or 
cohort for which financial statement values are being calculated . The actuary should 
recommend assumptions  that are internally consistent  within each product, line of business, 
 
7 
 block of business, or cohort . When assumptions  are not dependent on specific product 
features or company s pecific considerations (for example, U.S. Treasury yields or vol atility 
of a common equity index) , the actuary should recommend assumptions  that are consistent 
across product lines. The actuary should apply s imilar concepts of consistency in 
establishing provisions for risk of adverse deviation  or risk adjustment . If the assumptions  
or other provisions are not internally consistent, the actuary should document any known 
inconsistencies . 
 
3.8  Assumptions Selected by Another Party—W hen using assumptions  selected by another 
party, the actuary should review the assumptions  for reasonableness. If, in the actuary’s 
judgment, an assumption selected by the party is not reasonable or the actuar y cannot 
determine whether it is reasonable,  the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 41, Actuarial 
Communications .  
 
3.9 Methods —Methods used to determine G AAP financial statement amounts are generally 
prescribed by authoritative GAAP guidance and will vary according to the specific 
literature that applies.  
 
 When developing detailed techniques for application of GAAP methods , the actuary should 
take into account the following:  
 
a. the substance of the relationship between the issuer of the policy and the 
policyholder;  
 
b. the classification of the contract  (for example, short duration versus long duration, 
or insurance versus investment)  or contract features (for example, market risk 
benefits  or embedded derivatives) ; 
 
c. the expected life of the contract;  
 
d. the cash flow characteristics of the contract, including insurance company cash 
flows related to the contract but not directly associated with the contract provisions;  
 
e. any other items that are expected to have a material impact on the policy cash flows ; 
 
f. the materiality of resulting financial statement amounts; 
 
g. the sensitivity of the resulting financial statement amounts to changes in 
assumptions ; and  
   
h. the consistency with methods used for valuing contracts similar to those issued by 
the insurance comp any, if such information is available . 
 
3.10 Financial Statement Disclosures —When  contributing to disclosures related to GAAP 
financial statements, the actuary should comply with the prescribed requirements related 
to such disclosures. If the actuary’s contribution to these disclosures  meets the definition 
of an actuarial communication, the actuary sho uld follow the guidance in ASOP No. 41. 
 
8 
  
3.11 Premium Deficiency Testing —When testing for premium deficiency , the actuary should 
use best-estimate assumptions , current at the time of testing, without making provision 
for risk of adverse deviation , consistent with authoritative GAAP guidance . If a premium 
deficiency  arises , the actuary should use  current best -estimate assumptions  to dete rmine 
future changes in t he policy benefit liability , consistent with authoritative GAAP 
guidance . For types of contracts where lock -in applies, the current best -estimate 
assumptions  are then subject to lock -in.  
 
3.12 Recognition of Premiums —M ethods  to recognize premiums in income are determined by 
authoritative GAAP guidance and vary by the type of contract. Where t he recognition of  
GAAP net premiums  is applicable to the measurement of contract assets and liabilities  
including intangible balances , the actuary should confirm that the recognition is consistent 
with the recognition of gross premiums . 
 
3.13 Simplifications and Approximations —The actuary may, when appropriate, use 
assumptions , methods, and models that simplify calculations only if the results are 
reasonably expected not to differ materially from more detailed calculations. The actuary 
should seek guidance from accounting professionals on questions related to financia l 
statement materiality.  
 
3.14 Reliance on Others for Data, Projections,  Models, and Supporting Analysis —The actuary 
may rely on data, projections, models, and supporting analysis supplied by others. When 
practicable, the actuary should review the data, projections,  models, and supporting 
analysis for reasonableness and consistency. For further guidance, the  actuary should refer 
to ASOP No s. 23, 41, and  56, Modeling.  
 
3.15 Reliance on Another Actuary —The actuary may r ely on another actuary who has 
performed actuarial services  related to the preparation or review of GAAP financial 
statements . However, the relying actuary should be reasonably satisfied that the other 
actuary is qualified to perform such services , that the actuarial service was performed in 
accordance with applicable ASOPs, and that the actuarial service performed  is appropriate 
for the preparation or review of  GAAP financial statements .  
 
3.16 Reliance on Expertise of Others —An actuary  performing actuarial services  related to the 
preparation or review of GAAP financial statements  may rely on the expertise of others 
(including actuaries not performing actuarial services)  in other fields of knowledge  for 
input that is relevant and useful to the  GAAP financial statements . In determining the 
appropriate level of such reliance, the actuary should take into account the following:  
 
a. whether the individual or individuals upon whom the actuary is relying has 
expertise in the applicable field; 
 
b. the extent to which  the input provided has been reviewed or opined on by others 
with expertise in the applicable field, including any commonly known significant 
differences of opinion among others with expertise concerning aspects of the input 
that could be material to the a ctuary’s use of such input ; and  
 
9 
  
c. whether there are legal, regulatory, professional, industry, or other standards that 
apply to the input supplied by others with expertise in the applicable field, and 
whether the input has been represented as having met such standards.  
 
3.17 Documentation—The actuary should prepare and retain documentation to support 
compliance with the requirements of section 3 and the disclosure requirements of section 
4. The actuary should prepare such documentation in a form such that another actuary 
qualified in the same practice area could assess the reasonableness of the actuary’s work. 
The amount, form, and detail  of such documentation should be based on the professional 
judgment of the act uary and may vary with the complexity and purpose of the actuarial 
services. In addition, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 41 for guidance related to the 
retention of file material other than that which is to be disclosed under section 4.  
 
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures  
 
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report —When issuing an actuarial report within the 
scope of this standard, the actuary should refer to ASOP Nos.  21, 23, 25, 41, and 56. In 
addition, the actuary should disclose the following, if applicable:  
 
a. the assumptions chosen and the information reflected in the assumptions (see 
section 3.3);  
 
b. description of the discount rates used, including any methodology used to 
determine the discount rates (see section 3. 4); 
 
c. description of the provision for risk of adverse deviation  (see section 3. 5); 
 
d. description of the risk adjustment , including the  assumptions and methodology 
used (see section 3. 6); 
 
e. any known inconsistencies in the  assumptions , provisions  for risk of adverse 
deviation , or risk adjustment , and why these inconsistencies are appropriate  (see 
section 3.7);  
 
f. description of assumptions  selected by another party and any review performed by 
the actuary (see section 3. 8);  
 
g. description of any techniques developed by the actuary to determine financial 
statement amounts (see section 3. 9); 
  
h. description of the actuary’s contributions  in preparing financial statement 
disclosures (see section 3. 10); 
 
i. discussion of any recognition of premium deficiency  (see section 3. 11); 
 
 
10 
 j. description of the actuary’s  contributions  in formulating recognition of premiums 
(see section 3. 12); 
 
k. discussion of any significant simplifications or approximations (see section 3.13);  
 
l. extent of any reliance on others for data , projections, models, and supporting 
analysis  (see section 3. 14); 
 
m. extent of any reliance on another  actuary (see section 3. 15); and  
 
n. extent of any reliance on expertise of others (see section 3.16).  
 
4.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report —The actuary also should include 
disclosures in accordance with ASOP No. 41 in an actuarial report for the following 
circumstances:  
 
a.  if any material assumption or method was prescribed by applicable law  or 
authoritative  GAAP guidance ; 
 
b.  if the actu ary states reliance on other sources and thereby disclaims responsibility 
for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; 
and 
 
c.  if in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary has deviated materially from 
the gui dance of this standard . 
 
4.3 Confidential Information —Nothing in this standard is intended to require the actuary to 
disclose confidential information.  
  
 
11 
  
Appendix  1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
Note : This appendix is provided for informational purposes and is not part of the standard of 
practice.  
 
 
Background  
 
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) developed Audits of Stock Life 
Insurance Companies  (Audit Guide ) in 1972 with the cooperation of life insurance company 
accountants and actuaries. The Audit Guide  represented the first effort b y the accounting 
profession to establish GAAP for the life insurance industry. The Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (FASB) is now responsible for the determination of GAAP for companies 
whose financial statements are audited.  
 
Until 2009, the FASB published Statements of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS)  to guide 
accountants on specific transactions. Once published, these SFAS were then considered to be 
GAAP. On September 15, 2009, the multiple SFAS were replaced by the FASB’s Accounting 
Standards Codification (ASC), which became the standard for GAAP in the United States. The 
FASB now updates the ASC by issuing Accounting Standards Updates (ASUs). 
  
GAAP standards for stock life insurance companies are primarily established by ASC  Topic 944 
“Financial Services, Insurance” but other topics are also relevant. Prior to GAAP codification, 
these standards could be found in SFAS No. 60, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance 
Enterprises, and SFAS No. 97, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain 
Long- Duration Contracts and for Realized Gains and Losses from the Sale of Investments , 
among others . The FASB issued SFAS No. 60, which generally codified the concepts in the 
Audit Guide , in 1972. In 1987, the FASB issued SFAS No. 97, which (1) established GAAP for 
certain forms of insurance contracts not specific ally addressed by SFAS No. 60, primarily 
universal life -type contracts; (2) established GAAP for investment contracts not involving a 
significant insurance component; and (3) revised G AAP for limited -payment contracts. In 
November 1990, the AICPA issued Practice Bulletin 8,  providing guidance for certain questions 
related to SFAS No. 97.  
 
In 1995, the FASB issued SFAS No. 120, Accounting and Reporting by Mutual Life Insurance 
Enterpris es and by Insurance Enter prises for Certain Long- Duration Participating Contracts . 
This statement extended the requirements of SFAS No. 60 and SFAS No. 97 to mutual life 
insurers, established accounting for certain participating life insurance contracts of mutual life 
insurance enterprises (and stock life insurance subsidiaries of mutual life insurance enterprises), 
and permitted other stock life insurers to apply its provisions to participating life insurance 
contracts that meet the statement’s conditions . At the same time, the AICPA provided further 
clarification of the accounting requirements for long- duration participating contracts in 
Statement of Position (SOP) No. 95- 1, Accounting for Certain Insurance Activities of Mutual 
Life Insurance Enterprises. Other standards are also relevant, as is prevailing accounting practice 
 
12 
 in areas not specifically addressed by an SFAS. Prior to the issuance of SFAS No. 120, mutual 
life insurers’ statutory financial statements were, in practice, described as  being in accordance 
with GAAP.  
 
In 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018–12, Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-
Duration Contracts . This amendment changed the measurement and disclosure requirements for 
insurance products and product features.  The  mandatory effective date for public entities filing 
statements with the S ecurities E xchange Commission (SEC)  is January 1, 2023. For certain 
smaller companies and non -public companies, as defined by the  FASB , the ASU will be 
effective for annual statement s in 2025.  Early adoption is permitted in 2022. This will give rise 
to multiple accounting standards being applicable at the same time.  
 
Current Practices  
 
The Academy promulgated Financial Reporting Recommendations and Inte rpretations  
applicable to GAAP for insurance companies  to provide guidance to actuaries in this area before 
the formal appearance of ASOP No. 10 in 1989. Because of changes in GAAP resulting from 
SFAS No. 97, SFAS No. 120, and evolution in actuarial pract ice, ASOP No. 10 was revised in 
2011. The 2011 revision removed interpretations of GAAP literature and focused the standard on 
those activities for which actuaries are most directly responsible. Since 20 11, GAAP has 
continued to evolve , and it is appropria te once again to replace certain existing guidance and to 
promulgate a more generally applicable standard of actuarial practice with respect to insurance 
company GAAP  financial statements.   
 
The Insurance Experts Panel of the AICPA has developed certain interpretations of insurance 
accounting as promulgated by the FASB including for certain elements of ASU 2018–12. These 
interpretations have been added to the AICPA’s Audit and Accounting Guide, Life and Health 
Insurance Entities .  
  
 
13 
  
Appendix 2  
 
Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses  
 
The exposure draft of the proposed revision of ASOP No. 10, U.S. GAAP for Long- Duration 
Life, Annuity, and Health Products , was issued in April  2022 with a comment deadline of June  
30, 2022. Three comment letters were received,  some of which were submitted on behalf of 
multiple commentators, such as by firms or committees. For purposes of this appendix, the term 
“commentator” may refer to more than one person associated with a particular comment letter. 
The ASOP No. 10 Task Force and the Life  Committee  of the Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
carefully considered all comments received, and the ASB reviewed (and modified, where 
appropriate) the changes proposed by the Life  Committee.  
 
Summarized below are the significant issues and questions contained in the comment letters and 
the responses. Minor wording or punctuation changes that were suggested but not significant are 
not reflected in the appendix, although they may have been adopted.  
 
The term “reviewers” in appendix 2 includes the ASOP No. 10 Task Force, the ASB Life  
Committee, and the ASB. Also, the sect ion numbers and titles used in appendix 2 refer to those 
in the exposure draft, which are then cross referenced with those in the final ASOP.  
 
 
GENERAL  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  Two commentators suggested  having the ASOP  apply only to services relating to entit ies that 
have adopted ASU 2018- 12, and temporarily keeping the existing version of ASOP No. 10 for 
services relating to entities that have yet to adopt ASU 2018 -12. 
 
The reviewers acknowledge that entities are adopting ASU 2018 -12 at different times but be lieve 
relevant GAAP guidance should be contained in one ASOP, and therefore made no change in 
response to this comment.  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested removing  the proposed expansion of ASOP No. 10 to include  the 
review of financial statements in addition to preparation ( or alternatively, providing  expended 
guidance relating to review).  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change in response to this comment.  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding long -durati on property and casualty contracts to the scope of 
the ASOP.  
 
The reviewers believe the scope is appropriate and made no change.  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested e xcept for sections 1.1 and 1.2, and the opening paragraph of 
section 2, references to “authoritative GAAP guidance” should be removed . 
 
The reviewers believe that the references to authoritative GAAP guidance are appropriate and 
made no change in response to this comment.  
SECTION 2. DEFINTIONS  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested a definition of “assumption” be added.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
  
 
14 
 Section 2.1 , Best-Estimate Assumption  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested revising section 2.1  as follows: “Best -Estimate Assumption —An 
assumption that produces a current estimate of expected performance with no provision for 
adverse deviation.”  
 
The reviewers  disagree and made no change in response to this comment.  
Section 2.3 , Costs  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested removing  the parenthetic clause “(to the extent  allowable by 
authoritative GAAP guidance) .” 
 
The reviewers  disagree and made no change in response to this comment.  
Section  2.4, Deferred Policy Acquisition Cost (DPAC ) and 2.5 , Deferre d Sales Inducements (DSI)  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentor suggested inserting  the word “intangible” before “asset ” and inserting the 
phrase, “that were deferrable” at the end.  
 
The reviewers added the word “capitalized” to the definitions in response to this comment.  
Section 2. 6, GAAP Net Premium   
Comment  
 
 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested rewriting section 2.6  in a way that satisfies GAAP both before and  
after the effective date of ASU 2018 -12: “GAAP Net Premium —The portion of gross pr emium  
that provides for all costs except (a) those that are  required to be charged to expense as incurred 
and (b) after the effective date of ASU 2018 -12, policy  acquisition costs.” After the effective date 
of ASU  2018- 12, GAAP Net Premium may not exceed 100%  of gross premium.  
 
The reviewers revised the definition in response to this comment.  
Sections 2.6 , GAAP Net Premium , and  2.7, Gross Premium s 
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested defining  these premium terms in plural and updating the references 
in section 3.5.2 (now section 3.4.2 ) to conform with other references.  
 
The reviewers agree and made the suggested changes.  
Section 2.8 , Liability for Future Policy Benefits   
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested revising section 2.8 to read, “A liability of traditional insurance 
contracts,  measured as the present value of future policy benefits minus the present value of 
future net  premiums.”  
 
The reviewers clarified the language  in response to this comment.  
Section 2.9 , Lock -In 
Comment  
 
 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested rewriting section 2.9 to read, “A requirement to continue using an 
original basis  assumption as set at issue or acquisition or, prior to the effective date of ASU 2018 -
12, upon redetermination for a premium deficiency. After the effective date of ASU 2018 -12, this 
requirement  applies only to certain discount rates and, if the  reporting entity has elected, to non-
level cost  assumptions.”  
 
The reviewers clarified the definition in response to this comment.  
Section 2.12 , Net GAAP Liability  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested removing the reference to “intangible balances  related to 
reinsurance.”  
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
  
 
15 
 Section 2.13, Policy Benefit Liability   
Comment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding the following language to section 2.13: “The amount accrued 
for unearned revenue may or may not be shown separately in the company’s  financial statements 
but is included in the policy benefit liability for purposes of this standard.  Similarly, the amount 
accrued for unpaid claim  reserves for incurred claims may or may not be  shown separately in the 
company’s financial  statements but is included in the policy benefit  liability for purposes of this 
standard.”  
 
Rather than expanding this definition, the reviewers deleted the reference to financial statement 
placement.   
Section 2.14 , Premium Deficiency  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding a sentence for ASU 2018 -12 changes  to read: “After the 
effective date of ASU 2018 -12, DPAC and  maintenance costs are excluded from this  
determination.”  
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is sufficient as written and made no change.  
Section 2.15 , Risk of Adverse Deviation  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting this definition  and removing  all references to “risk  
of” adverse deviation from later sections.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 2.16, Value of Business Acquired (VOBA)  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested inserting “or liability” after “asset”  since purchase accounting may 
require a VOBA liability in certain situations.  
 
The reviewers substituted “balance” for “asset” to cover liability situations in response to this 
comment.  
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting the “…company’s operating policies…”  term from sections 
3.1, 3.2, 3.3.1,  and 3.5.1( b), citing concerns that many accounting decisions are made at the 
product -level.  
 
The reviewers replaced “operating policies” with “accounting policies” in response to this 
comment.  
Section 3.2 , Classification of Contracts, Features, and Benefits  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting the reference to short -duration vs. long -duration 
classification since this determination is part of accounting policy. Additionally, this 
commentator suggested including a reference to company accounting policies.  
 
The reviewers modified this section in response to this comment.  
Section 3.3.1 , Best-Estimate Assumptions  
Comment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested substantial revisions to the guidance on “best estimate assumptions” 
to include the following: “ The actuary should choose assumptions  to represent management’s 
expectations of future  cash flows including the effects of volatility.  Depending on the probability 
distribution of target  cash flows, best -estimate assumptions might be  represented in a single 
scenario or in a range of  scenarios. For example, death benefits of life  insurance contracts depend 
on mortality which, in  large numbers, approximates a normal distribution,  such that a single set 
of expected mortality rates will produce subs tantially the same expected cash flows  as a range of 
scenarios around mean mortality rates.  In contrast, one -sided constraints on nonguaranteed 
benefits might require a range of  scenarios to estimate the amount and timing of such benefits.”  
 
The reviewers believe that this section adequately addresses the need to consider multiple 
scenarios in the development of best -estimate assumptions and made no changes in response to 
this comment.  
  
 
16 
 Section 3.3.2.4 , Anticipated Experience  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested shortening section 3.3.2.4 and combining  the last two sentences . 
 
The reviewers modified the language in response to this comment.  
Section 3.4, Discount Rate Assumptions  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested consolidating guidance on discount rates and other assumptions.  
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 3.5.2 , Relationship to Anticipated Experience  
Comment  
 
 
Response  Several commentators suggested removing the ex ample because it could be viewed as providing 
an interpretation of authoritative GAAP guidance.  
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
Section 3.10 , Financial Statement Disclosures  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested  removing the second sentence  because it was not applicable in all 
circumstances . 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
Section 3.11 , Premium Deficiency Testing  
Comment  
 
 
 
Response  One commentator stated that t he current draft appears to retain premium deficiency testing 
wording from the prior version of the ASOP, with room for ambiguity as to whether premium 
deficiency testing will continue.  
 
While premium deficiency testing will be limited under ASU 2018 -12, the existing language was 
retained because the revised ASOP No. 10 will cover pre - and post -ASU 2018 -12 adoption. 
Authoritative GAAP guidance will determine whether premium deficiency testing must be 
performed.  
Section 3.12 , Recognition of Premiums  
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested omitting the list of balances.  
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language in response to this comment.  
Comment  
 
 
Response  Two commentators suggested modifications to this section because premium recognition 
methodologies are unlikely to be the actuary’s responsibility.  
 
The reviewers modified the language in response to these comments.  
SECTION 4. COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES  
Section 4.1, Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report  
Comment  
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested making changes  to this section to align with the suggested changes 
to section 3.2.  
 
The reviewers agree and made changes throughout section 4.1 to align with changes in sections 2 
and 3.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 52 
 
 
 
Principle-Based Reserves for Life Products  
under the NAIC Valuation Manual  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Developed by the  
Task Force on Principle-Based Reserves of the   
Life Committee of the  
Actuarial Standards Board  
 
 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
September 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Doc. No. 189)

ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
 
   ii   
T A B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S 
 
Transmittal Memorandum iv 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 1.2 Scope 1 
1.3 Cross References 1 
1.4 Effective Date 1 
 
Section 2.  Definitions 2 
2.1 Anticipated Experience Assumption 2 2.2 Cash Flow Model 2 2.3 Credibility 2 2.4 Deterministic Reserve 2 2.5 Granularity 2 2.6 Margin 2 2.7 Minimum Reserve 2 2.8 Model Segment 2 2.9 Modeling Cell 2 2.10 Net Premium Reserve 2 2.11 PBR Actuarial Report 2 2.12 Principle-Based Reserve 2 2.13 Prudent Estimate Assumption 3 2.14 Qualified Actuary 3 2.15 Relevant Experience 3 2.16 Risk Factor 3 2.17 Scenario 3 2.18 Sensitivity Testing 3 2.19 Starting Assets 3 2.20 Stochastic Reserve 3 2.21 Valuation Date 3 
 
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3 
3.1 Regulatory Requirements 3 3.2 Exclusion Tests 4 
3.2.1 Grouping 4 3.2.2 Certification 4 
3.3 Modeling Stochastic and Deterministic Reserves 5 
3.3.1 Model Segments 5 3.3.2 Model Validation 5 3.3.3 Liability Modeling Considerations 6 3.3.4 Use of Prior Period Data 7 
3.4 Assumptions for Stochastic and Deterministic Reserves 8 
3.4.1 Mortality 9 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
 
   iii  3.4.2 Investment Experience 9 
3.4.3 Policyholder Behavior 10 3.4.4 Expenses 13 3.4.5 Taxes 15 3.4.6 Determining Assumption Margins 15 
 3.5 Reinsurance 17 
3.5.1 Stochastic and Deterministic Reserves Net of Reinsurance 17 
3.5.2 Pre-Reinsurance-Ceded Minimum Reserve 17 3.5.3 Credit for Reinsurance Ceded 18 3.5.4 Recognition of Reinsurance Cash Flow s in the Deterministic Reserve or  
Stochastic Reserve 19 
3.5.5 Margin for Risk of Default by a Counterparty 20 3.5.6 Reinsurance Agreements that Do Not Qualify for Credit for Reinsurance 20 3.5.7 Assets Held by the Counter party or Another Party 20 
3.6 Reliance on Data or Other In formation Supplied by Others 21 
3.7 Documentation 21 
 
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures 21 
4.1 Actuarial Communications 21 4.2 PBR Actuarial Report 22 4.3 Additional Disclosures 22 
 
APPENDIXES 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 23 
Background 23 
Current Practices 24 
 
Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses 26 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
 
   iv  September 2017 
 TO: Members of Actuarial Organizations Govern ed by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Pe rsons Interested in Principle-Based 
Reserves for Life Products 
 FROM: Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ: Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 52  
 This document is the fina l version of ASOP No. 52, Principle-Based Reserves for Life Products 
under the NAIC Valuation Manual .  
 Background 
 The forces that led to the consideration of pr inciple-based approaches  to reserving for life 
insurance are discussed in appendi x 1 of this document. As change s to laws and regulations that 
would incorporate such approach es started to develop several years ago, the ASB decided to 
explore the need for a standard of practice and formed a task fo rce to produce a discussion draft 
of the standard. That task fo rce created a discussion draft containing actuarial guidance for 
carrying out a principle-based va luation that was consistent with “VM-20: Requirements for 
Principle-Based Reserves for Life Products” of the Valuation Manual . The discussion draft was 
reviewed by a large grou p of interested parties as the draf t of VM-20 itself changed over time.  
 First Exposure Draft 
 
In June 2013, the ASB approved a first exposure dr aft of this proposed st andard, with a comment 
deadline of December 16, 2013. Seven comment letter s were received and considered in making 
changes that were reflected in  the second exposure draft.  
 Second Exposure Draft 
 In June 2014, the ASB approved a second exposure draft, with a comment deadline of December 15, 2014. Eight comment letters were received a nd considered in making changes that were 
reflected in a “pending draft.”   Pending Draft 
 In June 2015, the ASB approved changes to the s econd exposure draft. However, since the draft 
involved compliance with a regula tion that had not yet taken eff ect, the ASB issued a “pending 
draft,” to be updated when the Standard Valuation Law and the Valuation Manual describing 
the principle-based reserves for life products took  effect. At that point, the standard would be 
considered for adoption or, possibly, modified  and re-exposed. Comments were not requested 
on the pending draft. 
 
Exposure Draft 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
 
   v   
The Valuation Manual  has been modified by numerous amendments since the pending draft 
was issued. In light of these amendments, a ne w task force was created to update the pending 
draft as needed. The task force found that many of the amendments were for clarification or 
were related to the new Commissioner’s Sta ndard Ordinary (CSO) table. A number of 
amendments prescribed specific methodology, such as requirements related to post-level period 
profits for term insurance or to disallow aggreg ation of reserves acros s product lines. Certain 
amendments required the application of actuari al professional judgment. The task force found 
the pending draft ASOP to provide sufficient gui dance for all but a few of those amendments 
and therefore made updates. The task force al so made minor clarifications and provided 
additional guidance in a few sec tions of the exposure draft. 
 In March 2017, the ASB approved the exposure draft with a comment deadline of May 31, 
2017. Fourteen comment letters were received and considered in making changes that are 
reflected in this final ASOP. For a summary of  issues contained in these comment letters, 
please see appendix 2. In general, the revisions provided clarification of the intent of the 
standard and did not result in subs tantive change to the standard.  
 Because VM-20 is a new method for statut ory valuation, the ASB expects numerous 
amendments to the Valuation Manual  over the next few years. The following language has been 
included in section 1.2 of this ASOP to address this:
 “In the event of a conflict between the 
provisions of the Valuation Manual  in effect at the time the actu arial services are provided and 
the provisions of the ASOP, the provisions of the Valuation Manual  shall govern.”   
 The ASB wishes to thank everyone who took the tim e to contribute comments and suggestions to 
the exposure drafts, and in particular offers speci al thanks to the previous iteration of the Task 
Force on Principle-Based Reserves, who drafte d this standard from concept through two 
exposure drafts and a “pending draf t.” Chaired by Frank Irish, th e task force comprised Jeremy 
Brown, Arnold A. Dicke, Jacqueline M. Keating, La rry H. Rubin, Allan W. Ryan, and Robert W. 
Stein.  The ASB voted in September 2017 to adopt this standard. 
 
 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
   vi   
Task Force on Principle-Based Reserves 
 
Linda M. Lankowski, Chairperson 
 Erik A. Anderson Jacqueline M. Keating  Arnold A. Dicke Michael C. Ward 
 
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
 David A. Brentlinger, Chairperson 
 Janica A. Duff Henry W. Siegel  Linda M. Lankowski Anthony J. Tokarz  John A. MacBain Matthew J. Wininger  
 
Actuarial Standards Board 
   
Maryellen J. Coggins, Chairperson 
 Christopher S. Carlson    Kathleen A. Riley  Beth E. Fitzgerald    Barbara L. Snyder  Darrell D. Knapp    Frank Todisco 
Cande J. Olsen Ross A. Winkelman 
  
               
 
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets st andards for appropriate actuarial practice 
in the United States through the developmen t and promulgation of Actuarial Standards of 
Practice (ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the procedures an actuary should follow when 
performing actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose when 
communicating the results of those services.  
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
1  ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
PRINCIPLE-BASED RESERVES  FOR LIFE PRODUCTS  
UNDER THE NAIC VALUATION MANUAL 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 1.1 Purpose—This actuarial standard of practi ce (ASOP) provides guidance to actuaries 
when performing actuarial services with  respect to developing or opining on principle-
based reserves (PBR)  for life insurance that are reported by companies in compliance 
with applicable law based upon the National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
(NAIC) Standard Valuation Law (referred to herein as the Standard Valuation Law ) and 
the NAIC Valuation Manual (Valuation Manual ) as adopted in December 2012 with 
subsequent amendments .  
 
1.2 Scope—This standard applies to  actuaries when performing actuarial services on behalf 
of life insurance companies, including fraterna l benefit societies, in connection with the 
calculation or review of re serves for life insurance policies subject to “VM-20: 
Requirements for Principle-Based Re serves for Life Products” in the Valuation Manual  
(VM-20).  To the extent an actuary partic ipates in the application of principle-based methods in the 
preparation of life insurance reserves unde r VM-20, whether assigned by the company 
under VM-G or not, that actuar y should follow the applicable guidance in this standard. 
In the event of a conflict be tween the provisions of the Valuation Manual  in effect at the 
time the actuarial services are provided and the provisions of the ASOP, the provisions 
of the Valuation Manual  shall govern.  
  If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with the Valuation Manual  or applicable law (statutes, regulations, and other legally binding 
authority), or for any other reason the actuary  deems appropriate, the actuary should refer 
to section 4.  
1.3 Cross References—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the original  referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date—This standard will be effective for valuation dates  on or after December 
31, 2017. 
  
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
2  Section 2. Definitions  
 
The terms below are defined for use in this act uarial standard of pr actice. Definitions 2.1, 2.2, 
2.4, 2.6, 2.8, 2.11, 2.13, 2.14, 2.16, 2.17, 2.20, and 2.21 are intende d to conform to those in the 
Valuation Manual .   
 2.1 Anticipated Experience Assumption—An expe ctation of future experience for a risk 
factor  given available, re levant information pertaining to the assumption being estimated.  
 2.2 Cash Flow Model—A model designed to simulate asset and liability cash flows.  
 
2.3 Credibility—A measure of the predictive valu e in a given application that the actuary 
attaches to a particular set of data ( predictive is used here in the statistical sense and not 
in the sense of predicting the future.) 
 2.4 Deterministic Reserve—A reserve amount calculated under a defined scenario  and a 
single set of assumptions.  
 2.5 Granularity—The level of  detail built into model component s, such as time intervals, cell 
structure, or assumptions  that vary by cell.  
 2.6 Margin—An amount included in the assumpti ons, except when the assumptions are 
prescribed, used to determine the modeled rese rve that incorporates conservatism in the 
calculated value consistent with the requi rements of the various  sections of the Valuation 
Manual . It is intended to provide for es timation error and adverse deviation.  
 
2.7 Minimum Reserve—The reserve described in sec tion 2 of VM-20 that is based on one or 
more of the following calculations: net premium reserve , stochastic reserve , and  
deterministic reserve . 
 2.8 Model Segment—A group of policies and associat ed assets that are modeled together to 
determine the path of net asset earned rates.  
 2.9 Modeling Cell—A group of policies or a ssets that are treated in a model  as being 
completely alike with regard to relevant risk factors  and contractual provisions and that 
may, therefore, be represented by a single composite policy or asset. 
 
2.10 Net Premium Reserve—The amount dete rmined in section 3 of VM-20.  
 
2.11 PBR Actuarial Report— The supporting info rmation prepared by the company as 
required by VM-31.  
 2.12 Principle-Based Reserve—A reserve amount that results from a principle-based 
valuation, which is defined in the NAIC’s model Standard Valuation Law . 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
3  2.13 Prudent Estimate Assumption—A risk factor  assumption developed by applying a 
margin  to the anticipated experience assumption  for that risk factor . 
 2.14 Qualified Actuary—An individual  who is qualified to sign the applicable statement of 
actuarial opinion in accordance with the Amer ican Academy of Actuaries qualification 
standards for actuaries signing such statemen ts and who meets the requirements specified 
in the Valuation Manual .  
 2.15 Relevant Experience—Experience th at exhibits characteristics that are sufficiently similar 
to the characteristics of the liabilities, asse ts, and environments being simulated to make 
the experience appropriate, in the actuar y’s professional judgment, as a basis for 
determining the anticipated experience assumptions . 
 2.16 Risk Factor—An aspect of future experi ence that is not fully predictable on the valuation 
date.  
 2.17 Scenario—A projected sequence of events used in the cash flow model , such as future 
interest rates, equity pe rformance, or mortality.  
 2.18 Sensitivity Testing—The process of calculati ng the effect of varying one or more 
assumptions. 
 2.19 Starting Assets—A portfolio of assets that will be used to fund projected policy cash 
flows arising from the polic ies funded by those assets. 
 2.20 Stochastic Reserve—The amount determined by applying a measur e (e.g., a prescribed 
CTE level) to the distribution of scenario  reserves over a broad ra nge of stochastically 
generated scenarios  and using prudent estimate assumptions  for all assumptions not 
stochastically modeled.  
 2.21 Valuation Date—The date when the reserv e is to be valued as required by the Standard 
Valuation Law .  
  
Section 3. Analysis of Issues  and Recommended Practices  
 
3.1 Regulatory Requirements—An actuary performing actuarial services within the scope of 
this standard should be familiar with a pplicable law and regulation including the 
Standard Valuation Law and the Valuation Manual,  with a focus on the sections (or parts 
of sections) of the Valuation Manual  that govern life in surance coverages. 
 Under the Standard Valuation Law and the Valuation Manual , compliance is the 
responsibility of the comp any. Section VM-G of the Valuation Manual requires the 
company to assign certain res ponsibilities to one or more qualified actuaries , including 
the responsibility for overseeing the calculation of principle-based reserves  and the 
responsibility for verifying that the assump tions, methods, and models used in such 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
4  calculations, as well as internal standard s and controls, appropr iately reflect the 
requirements of the Valuation Manual .  
 3.2 Exclusion Tests—Section 6 of  VM-20 provides for certai n exclusion tests that, if 
satisfied, allow the insurer to dispense with the calculation of the stochastic reserves or 
deterministic reserves for a group of policies. 
 3.2.1 Grouping—In constructing groups of contra cts for the purposes of applying the 
stochastic exclusion ratio test and the de terministic exclusion test, the actuary may 
not group together contract types with significantly different  risk profiles. 
 
In evaluating the risk profiles of policy groupings, the actuary should consider the 
following: 
 
a. the risk profile indicated by the contractual provisions of the policies and 
the impact of varying scenarios  on that risk profile; 
 
b. results of other analyses performed th at may provide an indication of the 
risk profile of a proposed group of po licies (for example, economic capital 
analysis or cash flow testing analysis);  
c. the risk profile indicated by the demographics of the policyholders and 
insureds; and  
d. any other information available to th e actuary that indicates that the 
policies have similar or signifi cantly different risk profiles. 
 
3.2.2 Certification—In some cases, the stochast ic exclusion test may be satisfied by 
providing a certification by a qualified actuary in accordance with section 6 of 
VM-20 that a group of policies is  not subject to material in terest rate risk or asset 
return volatility risk. When providing such a certification, the actuary should 
consider the significance of the impact on re serves of recognizing the interest rate 
or asset return volatility risk s in the reserve calculations . Examples of the types of 
methods that may be used to support su ch a certification are provided in the 
guidance note of section 6 of VM-20. In  applying these or any other method, the 
actuary should consider the possible impact  on reserves of factors such as the 
following: 
 
a.  changes in the economic environment or competitive landscape that may 
cause a material interest rate or asset return volatility risk  to arise in the 
future; and  
 b.  other factors found to be significant based on the results of analyses that 
may have been completed as part of an economic capital measurement 
process or cash flow testing.  
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
5  In certifying that a group of policies is not subject to material interest rate risk or 
asset return volatility risk and thus may be excluded from calculation of a stochastic reserve , the actuary may rely upon an  analysis performed for a 
different purpose that uses a set of scenarios  which, based on the actuary’s 
professional judgement, adequately capture s the interest rate or asset return 
volatility risk.   
3.3 Modeling Stochastic and Deterministic Reserves—When calculating stochastic reserves  
or deterministic reserves , the actuary should use assumptions, methods, and models as 
described in sections 7, 8, and 9 of VM-20.  The actuary should use modeling methods 
that are appropriate for the business being valued. 
 
3.3.1 Model Segments—Section 7 of VM-20 requ ires companies to design and use a 
cash flow model  that uses model segments  that are consistent with the insurer’s 
asset segmentation plan, investment strate gies, or approach used to allocate 
investment income for stat utory purposes. A separate cash flow model  should be 
used for each model segment . The construction of model segments facilitates the 
calculation of net asset earne d rates and disco unt rates. To do this, the actuary 
should model the reinvestment and disinve stment of cash flows in accordance 
with an investment strategy. Usually, this  means that the segment should contain 
only policies that will be manage d under a common investment policy, 
particularly with regard to reinvestment and borrowing practices. If this is not the 
case, the actuary should take into acc ount the effects of variations in the 
proportions of the policies subject to each such investment policy due to plausible 
changes in future conditions and demonstrate that the stochastic reserve  or 
deterministic  reserve being calculated  appropriately recognizes such variations. 
 
The actuary may assign policies with  offsetting risks to the same model segment 
if the assignment is consistent with the aggregation rules of the Valuation Manual  
and otherwise appropriate (for example,  when there is a common investment 
strategy or when policies are managed toge ther as part of an integrated risk 
management process) and the risks ma y reasonably be assumed to remain 
offsetting under plausible changes in future conditions. The actuary should 
identify offsetting risks and the rationale  for assigning policies with offsetting 
risks to the same model segment  in the model documentation. 
 
3.3.2 Model Validation—The actuary should review  a static validati on that confirms 
that initial values (for example, net premium reserves , face amount, policy 
count, premium in force, account values, net amount at risk, and other measures 
of inforce exposure to risk) materially ba lance to the insurer’s  records as of the 
valuation date  used to calculate the stochastic reserves and deterministic  
reserves . The actuary should consider the ex tent to which a model has been 
previously reviewed as we ll as controls around model ch anges in determining the 
level of model review required for the current valuation. A model that, in the 
actuary’s judgment, was previously subj ect to rigorous review and testing, and 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
6  was subsequently updated in a controlle d manner and validated, may require less 
rigorous current review. 
 
The actuary should obtain evidence that  the models used to perform the 
calculations discussed here appropriately represent the exposures and cash flows 
of the business being studied under varyi ng experience levels. To this end, the 
actuary should consider conducting additi onal validation procedures such as the 
following:  a. performing a dynamic validation of the model that involves comparing the 
cash flows produced by the model to the actual historical data to verify, 
where appropriate, that the model produces results reasonably similar to those actually experienced; 
 b. evaluating the consistency of the mode l’s results with the results of any 
other existing internal systems that have similar calculations, such as 
economic capital analysis and cash flow testing analysis; and 
 c. performing an analysis that critically  reviews each of the changes made to 
the model since it was last validated. 
 
3.3.3 Liability Modeling Considerations—In determining the stochastic reserve  or 
deterministic  reserve , the actuary should reflect re levant policy provisions and 
risks specific to the insu rance contracts, including t hose arising from guarantees 
that have a reasonable probabi lity of materially affecti ng future policy cash flows 
or other contract-related cash flows. Certain costs that are not specific to the 
insurance contract (for example, federal income taxes, shareholder dividends, and 
costs related to oper ational failures, mismanagement,  fraud, and regulatory risks) 
are not recognized in th e reserve calculation. 
 
a. The actuary may group policies with sim ilar risk profiles in representative 
modeling cells . The actuary should comply with the stipulations for 
simplifications, approximations, and m odeling efficiency techniques found 
in section 2 of VM-20. Acceptable demonstrations of compliance may include, but are not limite d to, the following:  
 
1) comparison of the results of the grouping based on a representative 
sample of modeling cells to the results of a seriatim calculation on 
the same representative sample; and  
2) a demonstration that extremes of adverse experience for a sample 
set of scenarios have closely similar effects on the stochastic 
reserve  or deterministic reserve for all policies assigned to the 
same sample modeling cells .  
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
7  Such demonstrations may be done as of a date other than the valuation 
date and need not be updated every year if the actuary determines that 
conditions have not changed in a manne r that would materi ally affect the 
result. 
 
b. In projecting policy or other liabi lity cash flows, the actuary should 
consider the impact of projected changes in experience on cash flows 
arising from nonguaranteed elements (including policyholder dividends). 
For example, if the insurer bases credited rates on current asset yields, the actuary would model projected credite d rates that are consistent with 
projected asset yields and with the company’s policy for determining 
nonguaranteed elements. If such policy is not written, then the actuary 
would determine the approach the company has historically followed in setting nonguaranteed elements.  
 
The actuary should evaluate whet her the modeling of nonguaranteed 
elements is appropriately aligned with  the company’s policy or historical 
approach for determining nonguaranteed elements and document those findings. The actuary should consider contractual provisions, regulatory 
constraints, current management policy, and past company actions, such as any lag between a change in experi ence and a change in nonguaranteed 
elements, when projecting future nonguaranteed element changes.   The actuary should determine policyholde r behavior assumptions that are 
consistent with the nonguaranteed element projections. For example, 
consistency may require increased lapse ra tes if credited interest rates tend 
to lag projected new money rate s in a rising interest rate scenario . 
 
3.3.4 Use of Prior Period Data—Section 2 of VM-20 provides that the company may 
calculate the stochastic reserve and the deterministic reserve as of a date no 
earlier than three months before the valuation date , using relevant company data, 
provided an appropriate method is used  to adjust those reserves to the valuation 
date. 
 
When using a calculation of a stochastic reserve  or deterministic reserve  as of a 
date prior to the valuation date , the actuary should document the nature of any 
updating adjustments made to the reserves  and why the use of prior period data 
plus such adjustments would not produce a material difference from calculating 
reserves as of the valuation date . The actuary should also demonstrate that any 
material events known to the actuary that occurred between the two dates do not diminish the appropriateness of the results.  When evaluating the appropriateness of using prior period data, the actuary 
should consider the following:  
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
8  a. a comparison of the asset portfolio betw een the two dates by type of asset, 
mix of assets by quality, and the nature  of assets (for example, duration, 
yield, and type) and a comparison of the size and nature of the inforce 
policies between the two dates (for ex ample, average size, policy counts, 
and mix); 
 b. changes in the interest rate curve, interest spreads, and equity values 
between the two dates, including, for example, changes causing guarantees 
to be “in the money” that were not as of the prior date, and vice-versa; 
 c. changes in policyholder behavior (suc h as surrenders, lapses, or premium 
patterns); and 
 d. validation procedures, such as co mparing a subset of policies by 
calculating reserves as of both dates. 
 
3.4 Assumptions for Stochastic and De terministic Reserves—In setting anticipated 
experience assumptions , the actuary should consider ASOP No. 23, Data Quality , and 
ASOP No. 25, Credibility Procedures , as applicable. Within the range of acceptable 
practices described in VM-20, the actuary sh ould use professional judgment in setting 
reasonable assumptions. 
 
Section 9 of VM-20 states that the company sh all use its own experience, if relevant and 
credible, to establish an anticipated experience assumption for any risk factor . Section 
9 goes on to say that if the company experien ce is not available or credible, the company 
may use industry experience or other data to establish the anticipated experience 
assumption , making modifications as needed to  reflect the circumstances of the 
company.  Where no relevant  and credible company experience is available, the actuary should use 
professional judgment in advising on the adop tion and modification of  other sources of 
experience data. Examples of items that may result in modifications to the experience 
data include the company’s underwriti ng and administrative practices, market 
demographics, product design, and econom ic and regulatory environments. 
 Section 9 of VM-20 requires sensitivity testing to determine which assumptions have the 
most significant impact on reserves. The ac tuary should consid er performing more 
extensive analyses in setting assumptions that have a significant impact on valuation 
results.  The actuary should consider granularity in setting assumptions given the model 
structure. The actuary should us e professional judgment to set granularity  to reflect 
expected experience appropriately. 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
9  3.4.1 Mortality—To the extent appropr iate, the actuary should base anticipated 
experience assumptions for mortality on the insure r’s underwriting standards 
and mortality experience. 
 
Section 9 of VM-20 limits the exposure period for a company’ s own experience 
to between three and ten years and requi res the company to define mortality 
segments for which separate mortality assumptions will be set. The methods for determining credibility of the experience and the methods for grading experience 
tables into industry standard tables are set forth in section 9 of VM-20. 
 In choosing an exposure period, considera tion should be given to the possibility 
that data may be obsolete if the period is too long, but that a shorter period may 
reduce the credibility to be assigned to the data. The actuary should refer to 
ASOP No. 25 for guidance on credibility . The actuary should consider the 
possibility of combining several mortality segments to achieve a higher level of credibility , but in doing so the actuary should be aware that section 9 of VM-20 
allows such combining only if the mort ality experience was determined for the 
combined segments and then appropriate ly subdivided for valuation purposes. 
 The actuary should consider reflecting the effect that lapse or nonrenewal activity 
or other anticipated policyhol der behaviors has had or w ould be expected to have 
on mortality. The actuary should consider th e effect of any anticipated or actual 
increase in gross premiums or cost of insurance charges on lapse rates and the 
resulting effect on mortality due to antiselection.  In determining anticipated mortality, the actuary should consider mortality trends 
that have been observed in company, industry, or population experience and 
determine the extent to which such trends are expected to continue.  If the actuary believes mo rtality trends are expect ed to continue beyond the 
valuation date  and would cause an increase to reserves, then the actuary should 
consider reflecting such trends in the assumptions for the cash flow projections. 
Otherwise, for calculating reserves, the act uary should not project mortality trends 
beyond the valuation date .  
 While mortality improvement beyond the valuation date  is not to be used for 
calculating reserves, the actuary may include implicit margins , such as absence 
of mortality improvement beyond the valuation date , when estimating the impact 
of individual and aggregate margins in the deterministic reserve that the actuary 
is required to report under VM-31.  
 
3.4.2 Investment Experience—The actuary shoul d make reasonable assumptions about 
future investment experience that take into consideration the insurer’s 
asset/liability manage ment strategy for the product portfolio. 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
10  a. The process for obtaining sets of scenarios of future U.S. Treasury rates 
and future equity values is specified in appendix 1 of VM-20. In applying 
these sets of scenarios , the actuary may use scenario reduction 
techniques. When using these technique s, the actuary should be satisfied 
that the techniques used are appropriate  to the situation and comply with 
the requirements of section 7 of VM-20.  
b. Factors and methods for determining prescribed default assumptions and 
spread assumptions are set forth in  section 9 and appendix 2 of VM-20. 
The prescribed default assumptions appl y to reinvested assets as well as 
starting assets . The actuary should model the reinvestment of cash flows 
in accordance with the insurer’s investment strategy for the model 
segment or in accordance with a strategy that is closely similar to the 
actual strategy currently being used for the model segment . If the 
insurer’s investment strategy is to duration-match assets and liabilities, the actuary should reflect the rebala ncing needed specific to each scenario to 
the extent practicable. The actuary s hould comply with the requirement in 
section 7 of VM-20 that the modeled reserve is not less than the reserve that would have been obtained by using the alternative investment 
strategy.  
 c. The actuary should incorpor ate variability in the timing of the asset cash 
flows related to movements in interest rates, such as prepayment risk, as 
described in section 7 of VM-20 into the model. For example, the actuary 
should model prepayment, extension, cal l, and put features in a manner 
consistent with current asset adequ acy analysis practice. (For related 
guidance, see ASOP No. 7, Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty 
Insurer Cash Flows , and ASOP No. 22, Statements of Opinion Based on 
Asset Adequacy Analysis by Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers. ) 
 
3.4.3 Policyholder Behavior—In modeling anti cipated policyholder behavior, the 
actuary should develop assumptions related to option elections available to 
policyholders, including, but not limited to, premium payment patterns, premium 
persistency, surrenders, w ithdrawals, transfers between fixed and separate 
accounts on variable products , and benefit utilization. 
 
a. General Considerations—The actuary should consider all policyholder 
behavior assumptions listed in section 9 of VM-20. In addition, the 
actuary should consider: 
 
1) varying policyholder behavior assumptions by additional 
characteristics not listed in sec tion 9 of VM-20, when deemed to 
be material for that block of business;  
2) how policyholder behavior assumpti ons impact or interact with 
other assumptions used in the valuation; 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
11   
3) whether it is reasonable  to base assumed po licyholder behavior on 
the outcomes and events exhibi ted by historical experience, 
especially when modeling policyholder behavior for a new product benefit or feature or when m odeling a significantly different 
economic environment. Historical experience, when available, is 
often a good basis for such assu mptions; however, the actuary 
should also consider the extent to which past behavior is a 
reasonable indicator of future be havior. For example, market or 
environmental changes can make historical experience less 
relevant;  
4) whether any options embedded in  the product, such as term 
conversion or policy loan op tions, may affect policyholder 
behavior. For example, as the value of a product option increases, the likelihood that policyholders will behave in a manner that maximizes their financial interest in the contract will increase. This may result in lower lapses or higher benefit utilization than otherwise anticipated;  
5) whether anticipated policyholder  behavior assumptions are 
consistent with relevant experience and reasonable future 
expectations. At any duration for wh ich relevant data do not exist, 
the actuary should also c onsider the following:  
 
i. the policyholder may act like a rational investor who will 
consider the impact of different  actions (for example, lapse 
the policy, persist, or take out a loan) on the value of the policy;  
ii. the policyholder may place value on factors other than 
maximizing the policy’s financial value (for example, convenience of level premiums or personal budget choices); and  
iii. the policy’s full economic value to the policyholder 
depends not only on its currentl y realizable va lue but also 
on factors not available for anal ysis, such as the health of 
the insured and the financial circumstances of the beneficiaries and policyholder; and 
 
6) use of a scenario-dependent formulation for anticipated 
policyholder behavior. If the actuary uses a static assumption for policyholder behavior, the actuary should doc ument the reasoning. 
The actuary should also consider  creating demonstrations to 
support such reasoning. For risk factors that are scenario-
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
12  dependent, the actuary should inco rporate a reasonable range of 
future expected behavior c onsistent with the economic scenarios 
and other variables in the model. In the absence of evidence to the 
contrary, modeling extreme behavior may not be necessary; however, the actuary should test the sensitivity of results to 
understand the materiality of using alternate assumptions. 
 
b. Premium Payment Assumptions—The actua ry should consider that not all 
policyholders will exhibit the same pr emium payment pattern. In setting 
assumptions about future premium payments for policies with fixed future premiums, the actuary should consid er available policy options. When 
determining premium payment patterns, the actuary should consider the impact of non-cash options, such as loans to pay premiums, and the value a policyholder places on non- forfeiture benefits.  
 
For policies with flexible or nonguar anteed premiums, the actuary, in 
designing assumptions about future premium payments, should consider 
such factors as the limitations inhere nt in the policy design, the amount of 
past funding of the policy, and th e marketing of the policy. Premium 
payment assumptions may also vary  by interest rate or market scenario . 
The actuary should consider using multiple premium payment pattern 
assumptions, for example, by subdividing the business into several modeling cells , each with a separate payment pattern assumption. If this is 
not done and consequently the business has one modeling cell  and 
average pattern, the actuary should comply with the stipulations for 
simplifications, approximations, and m odeling efficiency techniques found 
in section 2 of VM-20. Acceptable demonstrations of compliance may 
include results of sensitivity testing .  
 In setting premium payment assumptions, the actuary should consider the premium payment patterns listed in  VM-31. The actuary  should consider 
the following marketing factors that may affect the level and continuation of premium payments: 
 
1) emphasis on death benefits; 
 
2) emphasis on savings accumulation or tax advantages; 
 
3) emphasis on premium payment flexibility; 
 
4) policy illustrations showing premiums for a limited period; 
 
5) automatic electronic payment of premiums; 
 
6) bonuses for higher premiums or assets; 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
13  7) nonguaranteed elements; and 
 
8) other factors the actuary deems appropriate. 
 
In selecting premium payment pattern s for modeling purposes, the actuary 
should consider the premium paym ent patterns listed in VM-31. The 
actuary may consider patterns based on one or more of the following: 
target premium, illustrated premium,  billed premium, minimum premium, 
maximum commissionable premium, or  continuation of past premium 
levels. The actuary should consider that a policyholder may utilize more 
than one premium payment pattern during the lifetime of the policy. For example, some policyholders may pay illustrated premiums for several years, followed by a period of paying minimum premiums to keep their policy in force. 
 
c. Partial Withdrawal and Surrender Assumptions—The actuary should 
consider using a scenario-dependent  formulation for modeling partial 
withdrawals and surrenders that is responsive to factors such as the projected interest rate environment, the funding level, premium increases, 
and benefit triggers. In setting partial withdrawal and surrender 
assumptions, the actuary should consider  the insured’s age and gender, the 
policy duration, the existence of polic y loans, and scheduled changes in 
premium and benefit amounts. In a ddition, the actuary should consider 
taking into account such factors as th e policy’s competitiveness, surrender 
charges, interest or persistenc y bonuses, taxation status, premium 
frequency and method of payment, changes in nonguaranteed elements, 
and any guaranteed benefit amounts. Th e actuary should consider the fact 
that rates of surrender can decline dr amatically prior to a scheduled sharp 
increase in surrender be nefit (sometimes known as  a “cliff”) caused by a 
decrease in surrender char ge, a bonus, or a maturity  benefit and that rates 
of surrender can rise materia lly after such an event. 
 
3.4.4 Expenses—The actuary should review the e xpenses that have been allocated, for 
financial reporting purposes, in recent years to the block of policies being 
evaluated. Expenses that are classified in financial reporting as “direct sales 
expenses” or as “taxes, licenses, and f ees” should be allocated to the activity 
creating the expense. All non-direct e xpenses should be allocated to the 
appropriate activity count (for  example, per policy or per claim) and by duration 
where appropriate, using reasonable princi ples of expense allocation and unit 
costs. The actuary should use this analysis  as the basis for pr ojecting expenses in 
doing the reserve valuation, unless, in the actuary’s professional judgment, the 
expense experience is not a suitable basi s for projection, in which case other 
sources of data may be used, as set forth in section 3.4.4(b), Applying Recent Expense Experience. 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
14  a. Expense Inflation—Section 9 of VM-20 requires expenses to reflect the 
impact of inflation. The actuary should  appropriately adjust unit costs in 
the projection for the effect of infla tion. Possible sources of information 
about inflation assumptions are publis hed projections of the consumer 
price index or the price de flator, such as the rate selected by the Social 
Security Administration for its long-term intermediate projection. The actuary may also consider the possibility that futu re inflation rates will 
vary if prevailing new-money rates ch ange. The actuary should review the 
resulting projection of implied “real retu rn” to ensure that the inflation and 
investment return assumptions are consistent. 
 b. Applying Recent Expense Experience—In reviewing recent experience, 
the actuary should assure that the expe nses being allocated to the block of 
policies being evaluated re present all expenses associated with the block, 
including overhead, according to stat utory accounting pr inciples. If the 
recent experience on the block is not, in the actuary’s professional judgment, a suitable basis for projecti on, the actuary may consider the use 
of experience on a closely similar ty pe of policy within the company or 
intercompany studies. 
 
The actuary should consider includ ing a provision for overhead that 
accounts for holding company expenses a ssociated with running the life 
insurance business (for example, re nt and executive compensation) that 
have not been recognized in other ch arges to or reimbursements from the 
life company.  
In developing expense assumptions, the actuary should include acquisition 
expenses and significant non-recurring expenses expected to be incurred 
after the valuation date  to the extent allocable to the business in force at 
the valuation date . The actuary should include provision for unusual 
future expenses that may be anticip ated, such as severance costs or 
litigation costs.  If system development costs or other capital expenditures are amortized in 
the annual statement, the actuary shoul d reflect such amortization in the 
assumptions. If such expenditures o ccurred in the exposure period and 
were not amortized, the actuary may ex clude them from the experience but 
should consider the possibility that si milar expenditures will occur in the 
future.  In projections of direct expenses, the actuary should consider recent 
changes in company practice, such as  changes in commission rates that 
may not have been fully reflected in the experience. The actuary’s projection of taxes, licenses, and fees should be based on a reasonable 
activity base (such as premium).  
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
15  The actuary should reflect recent cha nges in company practice, such as 
changes in staffing levels that could increase non-direct  expenses in the 
projection. In the case of change s that are planned but not fully 
implemented, the actuary may consider  reflecting in the projection the 
probability that the changes w ill increase future expenses. 
  
3.4.5 Taxes—Section 9 of VM-20 requires the company to determine reserves using 
models in which federal and forei gn income taxes are excluded from 
consideration. The actuary should recogni ze all other taxes in the projection 
models. 
 
3.4.6 Determining Assumption Margins—After the anticipated experience 
assumptions are established, the actuary should modify each assumption to 
include a margin for estimation error and moderately  adverse deviation, such that 
the stochastic reserve  or deterministic  reserve being calculated is increased, 
except as indicated below. The actuary should incorporate an adequate margin 
with respect to  assumptions that are modeled dynamically (i.e., assumed to vary 
as a function of a stochast ic assumption, such as la pse rates) throughout all 
variations. The actuary is  not required to include margins in assumptions for risks 
that are to be modeled st ochastically as long as a moderately adverse proportion 
of the stochastically generated re sults is used for establishing the stochastic 
reserve . 
 
a. Mortality Margins—Section 9 of VM-20 prescribes the margins that are 
to be added to the anticipated experience mortality assumptions but also 
requires the establishment of an additional margin if the prescribed 
margin is inadequate. The actuary shoul d use professional judgment in 
determining such additional margin . The guidance in the remainder of 
this section on determining assumption margins does not apply to the 
prescribed mortality assumptions, but does apply when determining 
additional margins  for mortality. 
 b. Establishing Margins—For each assumption that includes a margin , the 
actuary should reflect the degree of ri sk and uncertainty in that assumption 
in determining the magnitude of such margin . When determining the 
degree of risk and uncertainty, the actuary should take into account the 
magnitude and frequency of fluctuations in relevant experience , if 
available. In doing so, the actuary should consider using statistical 
methods to assess the potential volatil ity of the assumption in setting an 
appropriate margin . 
 
In determining the margins for policyholder behavior assumptions for 
which there is an abse nce of credible and relevant experience , the actuary 
should follow the requirements of s ection 9 of VM-20 and consider the 
following: 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
16  1) experience trends by duration wher e there is relevant data; and 
 
2) the expectation that experience will change in the future due to 
policy features, economic condi tions, or other factors. 
 
After establishing margins for individual assumptions, the actuary should 
review the cumulative impact for all assumptions to determine whether, in the actuary’s professional judgment, the margins  are at a level that 
provide for an appropriate amount of adverse deviation in  the aggregate. 
The actuary then may reduce the margin  for an individual risk factor  
provided the actuary can demonstrate that the reduction is reasonable, 
considering the correlations between this risk factor  and other risk 
factors  (see also section below on “O verall Impact of Assumption 
Margins”). 
 
c. Sensitivity Testing—The actuary should use sensitivity testing to evaluate 
the significance of an assumption in determining the valuation results. For 
assumptions that have a non-material impact on reserves, the actuary may 
decide to add little or no margin to the anticipated experience 
assumption . 
 
d. Overall Impact of Assumption Margins—In evaluating the 
appropriateness of the assumption margins , the actuary may consider the 
amount of margin  in the deterministic reserve  for a group of policies, 
unless: 1) the actuary believe s the impact of the individual margins would 
be significantly lower under the stochastic reserve  calculation, and 2) the 
stochastic reserve  is larger than the deterministic reserve . If these two 
conditions are met, the actuary may de termine that the appropriateness of 
assumption margins  should be evaluated on the basis of stochastic  
reserves . 
 If the actuary determines that evaluating the assumption margins  in the 
deterministic reserve  is appropriate, the ac tuary should compare the  
deterministic reserve to the deterministic reserve without margins (i.e., 
the deterministic reserve  determined according to section 4 of VM-20 
but using anticipated experience assumptions ) for a group of policies. If 
the actuary determines that  evaluating the assumption margins  should be 
done on the basis of stochastic reserves , the actuary should compare the  
stochastic reserve to a stochastic reserve without margins (i.e., the 
stochastic reserve  determined according to section 5 of VM-20 but using 
anticipated experience assumptions ) for a group of policies. For this 
purpose, “group of policies” may mean a line of business, or the actuary 
may make the comparison on several gr oups of policies within a line of 
business. The actuary should set margins for individual assumptions  such 
that the  stochastic reserves or deterministic reserves  being calculated  
are greater than the corr esponding reserves without margins by an amount 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
17  that is consistent with the risks to which the gro up of policies is exposed. 
In evaluating the appropriateness of the assumption margins  to the risks 
to which the group of polic ies is exposed, the actua ry may, for example, 
relate the assumption margins  to a percentage of the present value of risk 
capital requirements on the group of po licies, consider the conditional tail 
expectation  implied by the use of prudent estimate  assumptions , or 
consider historical vari ations in experience. 
 If the actuary concludes that the assumption margins  are either excessive 
or inadequate in comparison to the risks to which the group of policies is exposed, the actuary should adjust margins  for individual assumptions so 
that the stochastic reserve  or deterministic reserve  being calculated is 
appropriate in comparison to the risks to which the group of policies is exposed. The actuary may reduc e the initially determined margin if the 
actuary  can demonstrate that the method used to justify the reduction is 
reasonable, considering (1) the range of scenarios  contributing to the 
conditional tail expecta tion calculation, (2) the scenario  used to calculate 
the deterministic reserve , or (3) appropriate a dverse circumstances for 
risk factors  not stochastically modeled. 
 When calculating the aggregate margin  for VM-31 purposes, the actuary 
should follow the requirements of VM-31.  
  
3.5 Reinsurance—This section applies to reserv es for policies ceded or assumed under the 
terms of a reinsurance agreement. The te rms “reinsurance” and “reinsurer” include 
retrocession and retroces sionaire, respectively. 
 
3.5.1 Stochastic and Deterministic Reserves Ne t of Reinsurance—A ccording to section 
8 of VM-20, the stochastic reserves and deterministic reserves shall be based 
on assumptions and models that project ca sh flows that are net of reinsurance 
ceded. Thus, the actuary should use cas h flows that reflect the effects of 
reinsurance assumed and ceded when calculating stochastic reserves and 
deterministic reserves . 
 
The actuary should not calculate the stochastic reserve or deterministic reserve 
by deducting a formulaic rein surance credit (such as the Statement of Statutory 
Accounting Principles No. 61  reserve credit) from a stochastic reserve or 
deterministic reserve that is based on hypothetical pr e-reinsurance cash flows as 
discussed in section 3.5.2 below, unless, in the actuary’s professional judgment, 
such a procedure meets the criteria for using simplifications, approximations, and 
modeling efficiency techniques found in section 2 of VM-20. 
 
3.5.2 Pre-Reinsurance-Ceded Minimum Reserve— Section 8 of VM-20 requires a pre- 
reinsurance-ceded minimum reserve , if needed, to be calculated pursuant to the 
requirements of the Valuation Manual , using methods and assumptions consistent 
with those used in calculating the minimum reserve , but excluding the effect of 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
18  ceded reinsurance. Determining the minimum reserve requires the calculation on 
a pre-reinsurance-ceded ba sis of all necessary rese rve components, which may 
include a net premium reserve , a stochastic reserve , and a  deterministic 
reserve  for each group of policies defined in section 2 of VM-20, and the 
application of any exclusion tests.  
 
Section 8 of VM-20 states that the a ssumptions used in calculating the pre-
reinsurance-ceded minimum reserve  should represent company experience in the 
absence of reinsurance—for example, assuming that the business was managed in a manner consistent with the manner that retained business is managed. In arriving at the assump tions for use in the cash flow model required for 
deterministic reserve and stochastic reserve calculations, the actuary should 
consider using methods and assumptions fo r the ceded business th at are consistent 
with those used for retained busine ss of the same kind (reflecting any known 
differences, such as differences in av erage policy size). For example, the 
calculation of a pre-reinsurance-ceded stochastic reserve  or deterministic 
reserve  requires the construction of  a hypothetical portfolio of starting assets  
and a corresponding model investment stra tegy. Possible methods for constructing 
the hypothetical portfolio include, bu t are not limited to, the following: 
 
a. basing the portfolio on a ssets available at the time the cash flows were 
ceded; 
 b. assuming the portfolio consis ts of assets consistent with those backing the 
portion of the business retained fo r policies of the same kind; and 
 
c. assuming the portfolio consists of a pr o-rata slice of the assets of the 
reinsurer that back the reserve for the segment of its business that includes 
the ceded policies.  
If the hypothetical portfolio  is assumed to include starting assets  held by the 
reinsurer or another party, the actuary should refer to the guidance in section 3.5.7 
of this ASOP. 
 
3.5.3 Credit for Reinsurance Ceded—According to  section 8 of VM-20, the credit for 
reinsurance is the difference between the excess, if any, of the pre-reinsurance-
ceded minimum reserve  and the post-reinsurance-ceded minimum reserve . The 
actuary should apply the exclusion criteria  and formulas of section 2 of VM-20 
separately for each of these minimum reserves and should apply the guidance of 
this standard to calculate any needed stochastic reserve or deterministic reserve 
component. The actuary should be aware that  the credit for reinsurance might not 
be the difference between the pre- and post-reinsurance-ceded versions of the 
same reserve component.  
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
19  The actuary should allocate the credit for reinsurance ceded using a method that is 
consistent with section 8 of VM-20 and produces reasonable results. The actuary 
should document the allocation methodology used.  
3.5.4 Recognition of Reinsurance Cash Flows in the Deterministic Reserve or 
Stochastic Reserve—VM-20 requires the calculation of the stochastic reserve or 
deterministic reserve to be based on assumptions and margins that are 
appropriate for each company involved in  a reinsurance agreement. The two 
parties to the agreement are not required to use the same assumptions and margins for the reinsured policies. 
 
The actuary should choose assumptions for projecting cash flows for assumed 
reinsurance and for ceded reinsurance that  consider all asp ects of applicable 
reinsurance agreements, including all elements of the agreements that the assuming company can change (such as the current scale of reinsurance premiums and expense allowances) and all actions eith er party may take th at could affect the 
reinsurance cash flows (such as change s by the ceding company in nonguaranteed 
elements or the recapture of ceded policies). The actuary should consider whether such changes depend on the economic scenario being modeled. 
 
a. In modeling nonguaranteed elements, the actuary may consider any limits 
placed upon the reinsurer’s ability to  change the terms of the treaty, 
including the presence or absence of guarantees of reinsurance premiums and allowances; known actions of the ceding company, such as changes in 
dividend scales; known past  practices of reinsure rs in general and the 
assuming reinsurer in particular regard ing the changing of such terms; and 
the ability of the ceding company to modify the terms of the reinsured 
policies in response to changes in the reinsurance agreement. 
 
b. The actuary should consider any actions  that have been taken or appear 
likely to be taken by the ceding company or direct writer, if different, that 
could affect the expected mortality or other experience of assumed policies. Examples of such actions include internal replacement programs 
and table-shave programs. 
 c. The actuary should choose assumptions and margins assuming that all 
parties to a reinsurance agreement are knowledgeable of the terms of the 
reinsurance agreement and will exercise  options to their advantage, taking 
into account the context of the agreement in the entire economic 
relationship between the parties. 
 d. In applying the considerations in para graphs a, b, and c above, the actuary 
should take into account the impact of  the economic conditions inherent in 
the scenario being modeled. 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
20  e. Section 8 of VM-20 requires the use of stochastic modeling or analysis to 
set assumptions for risk factors associated with certain provisions of 
reinsurance agreements. A guidance not e in section 8 of  VM-20 identifies 
stop-loss reinsurance as an exampl e of such a provision. The actuary 
should consider the distribution of cl aims for the coverage provided under 
the provisions of the reinsurance agreement to determine whether and to what extent a single deterministic valuation assumption adequately captures the risk.  Stochastic modeling of assumptions for risk factors for which a single 
deterministic valuation assumption is inadequate may be introduced directly in the cash flow model , or a separate stochastic analysis outside 
the model may be performed. In deciding between these approaches, the actuary should consider the degree to which a separate stochastic analysis 
of assumptions should interact  with the variables in the cash flow model . 
When there is a high degree of inte raction, the actuary  should consider 
incorporating the analysis directly into the cash flow model .  
 In setting margins for such assumptions, the actuary should take into 
account any conservatism introduced by the stochastic modeling method 
(such as the conservatism introduced by a conditional tail expectation method).  
 
3.5.5 Margin for Risk of Default by a Counter party—Section 8 of VM-20 requires the 
company to establish a margin for the risk of default if the company has 
knowledge that a counterparty  is financially impaired. In the absence of such 
knowledge (or if the impact on cash flows is insignificant) no such margin is 
required. In determining the risk margin  for counterparty default if one is needed, 
the actuary may rely upon the company’ s determination of whether such 
impairment exists and the probability of default. 
 
3.5.6 Reinsurance Agreements that Do Not Qualify for Credit for Reinsurance—
Section 8 of VM-20 states that if a re insurance agreement or amendment does not 
qualify for credit for reinsurance, but treating the reinsurance agreement or 
amendment as if it did so qualify woul d result in a reduction to the company’s 
surplus, then the company shall increase the minimum reserve by the absolute 
value of such reduction in surplus. The impact on surp lus may be ascertained by 
calculating the minimum reserve with and without reflection of the non-
qualifying reinsurance agreement or amendm ent. If the actuary concludes that 
such calculations are un necessary, the actuary shoul d document the testing and 
rationale leading to  that conclusion. 
 
3.5.7 Assets Held by the Counterparty or Anot her Party—If, under the terms of the 
reinsurance agreement, some of the asse ts supporting the reserve are held by the 
counterparty or another part y, the actuary should determ ine whether such assets 
should be modeled to determine discount ra tes or projected cash flows. In making 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
21  this determination, section 8 of VM-20 requires that the actuary consider the 
degree of linkage between the portfolio performance and the calculation of the 
reinsurance cash flows and the sensitivity of the valuation result to the asset 
portfolio performance. If the actuary concludes that modeling is unnecessary, the actuary should document the testing and ra tionale leading to that conclusion. If 
the actuary determines that modeling is necessary, the actuary may make use of the other party’s modeling of the assets  it holds, since section 8 of VM-20 
provides that one party to a reinsuran ce transaction may make use of reserve 
calculations of the other party. The actuary should demonstrate that such 
modeling is consistent with the other assumptions made in the calculation of the stochastic reserve or deterministic reserve  or that appropriate adjustments have 
been made. 
 3.6 Reliance on Data or Other Information S upplied by Others—When relying on data or 
other information supplied by others, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 23 for 
guidance. In addition, where the actuary  relies on others for data, assumptions, 
projections, or analysis in determining the principle-based reserves , the actuary should 
comply with specific requirements of the Valuation Manual . 
 
3.7 Documentation—Section 2 of VM-31 states that the PBR actuarial report  must include 
documentation and disclosure sufficient for an other actuary qualified in the same practice 
area to evaluate the work. The actuary shoul d include the rationale for all material 
decisions and actuarial certifications made  and information used by the company in 
complying with the minimum reserve requirements and in complying with the 
documentation and reporting requi rements set forth in the Valuation Manual with respect 
to the PBR actuarial report . 
 
To the extent practicable, the actuary should support the retention of documentation 
required by section 2 of VM-31 for a reasona ble period of time (and no less than the 
length of time necessary to comply with the Valuation Manual , and any statutory, 
regulatory, or other requirements). The act uary need not retain the documentation 
personally; for example, the actuary’s principal may retain it.  The qualified actuary  assigned responsibility for a group of policies under  VM-G should 
document the procedures performed to suppor t required verifications. The actuary may 
include such documentation in the PBR actuarial report . 
  
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures
 
 
4.1 Actuarial Communications—When issuing actuari al communications under this standard, 
the actuary should refer to ASOP Nos. 23 and 41. In addition, the actuary should refer to 
ASOP No. 21, Responding to or Assisting Auditors or Examiners in Connection with 
Financial Audits, Financial Reviews, and Financial Examinations , where applicable. 
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
22  4.2 PBR Actuarial Report—The qualified actuary  assigned by the company the 
responsibility of preparing the PBR actuarial report  or a subreport for a particular group 
of policies should follow th e requirements of VM-31.  
 
Because VM-20 requires the company, rather than the qualified actuary , to set the 
assumptions, the qualified actuary  should refer to the disclosu re requirements in section 
3.4.4 of ASOP No. 41 when preparing the PBR actuarial report  or a subreport. 
 Whether required by VM-31 or not, the qualified actuary  should consider including the 
verifications referenced in sect ion 3.7 of this ASOP in the PBR actuarial report . 
 
4.3 Additional Disclosures—The actuary should in clude the following, as applicable, in the 
PBR actuarial report  or any other actuarial communication: 
 
a. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.2, if any material assumption or method 
was prescribed by applicable law (statute s, regulations, and other legally binding 
authority); 
 
b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; and  
c. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.4, if in the actuary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has othe rwise deviated materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP. 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
23   
Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
Note : This appendix is provided for informational pur poses and is not part of the standard of 
practice. 
 
Background 
 
Principle-based reserving for life insurance policie s is a new field of ende avor for actuaries, and 
accepted methods of practice are expected to emer ge as experience in the field develops. New 
developments will arise and be published in practi ce notes or other types of  actuarial literature. 
 
Prior to 1980, the regulation of life insurance statutory reserves  was very stable, with only 
occasional changes in the statutory interest ra tes and mortality tables. For many years, there 
were no significant changes in  the basic approach . After 1980, interest rate volatility of 
unprecedented magnitude, as well as the increasin g popularity of new policy types that did not 
fit easily into the existing structure, began to cast doubt on the approach that was being used. 
 
In response to the problem, changes were  introduced, including the adoption of dynamic 
statutory valuation intere st rates, the use of cash flow te sting of reserves, and a number of 
adaptations of minimum reserve requirements to  provide formulas appr opriate for different 
policy types. It became increasi ngly difficult to modify the exis ting structure to keep up with 
changing conditions. 
 
In addition, the statutory factors for interest and mortality were  designed to produce reserves 
that were high enough to cover a wide variety of situations and t hus were viewed as 
unnecessarily conservative for many companies. It was also evident that some risk factors were 
not explicitly addressed in the statutory approach, such as th e variety of choices open to 
policyholders (i.e., the items generally grouped u nder the heading of “policyholder behavior”) 
and the level and pattern of insurance company ex penses. These risk factors have a significant 
impact on reserve adequacy. 
 
The formulaic nature and prescriptive assumption set of statutory valuat ion techniques worked 
well for many years. However, as insurance pro ducts increased in complexity, and as new and 
innovative product designs changed the risk profile  of products offered by an insurer, it became 
apparent that revised regulations  and numerous actuar ial guidelines were not the best solution 
for the industry as a whole. On the insurance regulatory side, the Na tional Association of 
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) , state commissioners, and insu rance departments faced the 
challenge of maintaining the solvency objective of statutory reporting wh ile creating a valuation 
platform that could be maintained efficiently, enhance uniformity among the states, persist into 
the future, and remain appropriate for all type s of insurance products under various economic 
conditions . 
 
Thus, there were many reasons for considering th e need for radical changes in the statutory 
reserving system. In many other countries, progr ams for change had already been under way for 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
24  some time. In the United States, the NAIC Model Law 805, Standard Valuation Law , was 
revised in 2009 to provide for a new appro ach, “principle-based valuation,” under which 
reserve calculations make use of a company’ s own experience, when credible, subject to 
procedures set forth in a Valuation Manual . The phrases “principle-based valuation” and 
“principle-based reserves” are qu ite broad and could apply to ma ny different types of reserves. 
 
Committees within the actuarial profession ha ve been developing th e detailed regulatory 
provisions needed to implemen t principle-based reserving. Th e Life Practice Council of the 
American Academy of Actuaries has developed a practice note with respect to principle-based 
reserving. The need was also recognized for an  actuarial standard of  practice that would 
accompany the regulatory effort and would provide  additional guidance to the actuary preparing 
principle-based reserves. 
 
The regulatory structure for princi ple-based reserves is intended to be consistent with the 
objectives of statutory financial reporting, wh ich emphasize solvency for the protection of 
policyholders. In addition to statutory reserves, the insurer is also required to hold additional assets, known as “risk-based capital.” These rese rves and risk-based ca pital are intended to 
create an adequate margin of safety to ensu re that policyholder oblig ations and other legal 
obligations will be met when they come due.  While the responsibility for setting methods, models, and assumptions for each group of 
policies belongs to the company, VM-G of the Valuation Manual  requires the company to 
assign to one or more qualified actuaries the responsibility of verify ing that the methods, 
models, and assumptions appropriately  reflect the requirements of the Valuation Manual . The 
actuary is expected to perform these responsibilit ies in a manner consistent with the reserve 
requirements prescribed in the Valuation Manual , keeping in mind that the reserve 
requirements are intended to support a statutor y objective of a cons ervative valuation. The 
objective of a conservative valuation is discussed in both the Introduction to the Valuation 
Manual  and in section 12 of the Standard Valuation Law . The Introduction to the Valuation 
Manual  states that the statutory objective of a conser vative valuation is to  provide protection to 
policyholders and promote company solvency de spite adverse fluctuations in financial 
conditions or operating results, pursuant to Standard Valuation Law  requirements. Section 12 of 
the Standard Valuation Law  states that the funding associated with the contracts and their risks 
must incorporate a level of cons ervatism that reflects conditions , including unfavorable events, 
that have a reasonable probability of occu rring during the lifetim e of the contracts. 
  
Current Practices 
 
Since its introduction in the 1980s, cash flow te sting has become a well- established technique 
in most life insurance companies. ASOP No. 7, Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty 
Insurer Cash Flows, gives guidance on this technique. Th e current proposals for principle-
based reserve regulations use cash flow testing as a component of the recommended approach. 
 
The adoption of the Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Regulation in 1991, together with 
ASOP No. 22, Statement of Opinion Based on Asset Adequac y Analysis by Actuaries for Life or 
Health Insurers , made it mandatory for companies to use one or more of a set of techniques 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
25  (collected under the general heading of “asset ad equacy analysis”) in testing for adequacy of 
reserves in light of th e assets supporting them. Foremost among these techniques was cash flow 
testing. Asset adequacy analysis was designed as  an aggregate test to determine whether the 
insurer should establish reserves in excess of the statutory minimums and includes methods of 
quantifying this amount. To a degree, these same t echniques are paralleled in the determination 
of certain components of a principle-based valuation. 
 Product design features introduced since the 1980s have led to a need for additional guidance 
on how to reserve for products. Model Regulation 830, Valuation of Life Insurance Policies 
Model Regulation (XXX), and Actuarial Guideline 38 (AG 38),  Application of the Valuation of 
Life Insurance Policies Model Regulation (AXXX) , were developed to address concerns for 
specific products. Many observers believed thes e guidelines require rese rves that are overly 
conservative, and a number of companies began us ing captives to finance these extra reserves. 
Recent changes to AG 38 and the introduction and subsequent revision of Actuarial Guideline 48, Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Requireme nts for the Reinsurance of Policies 
Required to be Valued under Sections 6 and 7 of the NAIC Valuation of Life Insurance Policies 
Model Regulation  (AG 48) and the introducti on of Model Regulation 787, Term and Universal 
Life Insurance Reserve Financing Model Regulation  (Reserve Financing Regulation ), which 
deal with captive financing a rrangements, have caused many co mpanies to model their assets 
and reserves, rather than following a formulai c tabular approach. For 2015 and 2016 valuations, 
actuaries have been using methods from the Valuation Manual  as part of the calculations 
required by AG 38 and AG 48. AG 48 and the Rese rve Financing Regulation specifically 
reference VM-20.   
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
26   
Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses 
 
The exposure draft of this proposed ASOP, Principle-Based Reserves for Life Products under the 
NAIC Valuation Manual , was issued in March 2017 with  a comment deadline of May 31, 2017. 
Fourteen comment letters were received, some of which were submitted on behalf of multiple commentators, such as by firms or committ ees. For purposes of this appendix, the term 
“commentator” may refer to more than one person associated with a particular comment letter. The Principle-Based Reserve Task Force carefull y considered all comments received, reviewed 
the exposure draft, and proposed changes. The Life Committee and the ASB reviewed the proposed changes and made modi fications where appropriate. 
 Summarized below are the signifi cant issues and questions contai ned in the comment letters and 
responses.  
 The term “reviewers” in appendix 2 includes the Pr inciple-Based Reserves Task Force, the Life 
Committee, and the ASB. Also, unless otherwise not ed, the section numbers and titles used in 
appendix 2 refer to those in the exposure draft. 
 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Comment 
  
Response Several commentators said that the draft ASOP repeats too much of the Valuation Manual, and 
much of the text could be deleted.  
The reviewers considered these comments and made changes. In  many places, the reviewers 
believe much of the overlap is necessary to set the stage for guidance. 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator said that the use of “should co nsider” within the ASOP gives the actuary “an 
overly easy out.”  
 The ASB is deliberate regarding the use of different terms of construction. The reviewers note that 
ASOP No. 1, Introductory Standard of Practice , indicates that the phrase “should consider” 
denotes action. ASOP No. 1 goes on to say, “If, after consideration, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment an action is not appropriat e, the action is not required and failure to take this action is not 
a deviation from the guidance in the standard.” The reviewers believe the use of “should consider” 
is appropriate in the places it is used in this ASOP, and therefore made no change. 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator noted that the Valuation Manual  is expected to be revised frequently, and that 
direct quotes may soon become outdated.  
The reviewers agree and removed direct quotes.  
Comment  
 Response One commentator asked whether the ASOP could cl arify whether Actuarial Guidelines apply to 
PBR. 
 The reviewers note that VM-20 section 3.A.2 requires the application of VM-A and VM-C, which 
includes the Actuarial Guidelines. Theref ore, the reviewers made no change. 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
27  Comment 
 
Response One commentator noted overlap between the dr aft ASOP and the practice note on PBR. 
 
The reviewers note that practice notes and ASOPs may cover the same issues but serve different 
purposes, and therefore made no change. 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator suggested changing the title to Principle-Based Reserves for Life Products 
under VM-20.  
 
The reviewers agree with the suggestion and changed the title to Principle-Based Reserves for Life 
Products under the NAIC Valuation Manual.  
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested having a separate section to address simplifications, approximations, 
and model efficiency techniques as  allowed under VM-20 Section 2.G. 
 
The reviewers chose not to restructure the ASOP, but did update individual sections. 
Comment 
 Response Several commentators questioned whether this ASOP is necessary. 
 The reviewers believe that the guidance provided in this ASOP is a necessary  addition to actuarial 
standards.  
TRANSMITTAL MEMO RANDUM QUESTIONS 
Question 1: Is the guidance concerning VM ‐G clear and appropriate (section 3.1)? 
Comment Most commentators said th e guidance was clear and appropriate. 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested moving the last paragraph of section 3.1, Regulatory Requirements, 
into section 1.2, Scope.  
The reviewers agree and moved the paragraph. 
Question 2: Is the guidance concern ing the PBR Actuarial Re port clear and appropriate (section 4.2)? 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “qualif ied” before “actuary” in section 4.2. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change. 
Question 3: Are there any significant inconsistencie s between the requirements of this draft ASOP and the 
requirements of the Valuation Manual ? 
Comment 
 
 
Response Several respondents said there were no significant inconsistencies. The rest noted specific 
inconsistencies. 
 
The reviewers moved comments about inconsistenc ies to the appropriate section and addressed 
them there. 
Question 4: Does the proposed effective date of D ecember 31, 2017 provide suffi cient time to comply with 
this standard if the ASB adopts the standa rd in September 2017? 
Comment 
  
Response Three respondents said yes; two expressed concern that companies would not have enough time to 
comply with the ASOP.  
Given that companies could be calculating reserves under VM-20 by December 31, 2017, and 
limited concerns regarding the effective date, the ASB set Decem ber 31, 2017 as the ASOP’s 
effective date. 
SECTION 1. PURPOSE, SCOPE, CROSS REFERENCES, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
Section 1.2, Scope 
Comment 
 
 One commentator suggested that the ASOP speci fy whether the ASOP applied to group or 
individual products .  
 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
28  Response The reviewers prefer to keep the general refe rence to life products, as the guidance should apply to 
both individual and group products. The reviewers removed the word “individual” in sections 1.2 
and 3.1. The actuary should refer to the Valuation Manual  for applicability. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator said it was unclear whether the AS OP pertains to quarterly valuations or only 
the annual filing. 
 
The reviewers note this standard applies to ac tuaries when performing actuarial services in 
connection with the calculation or review of reserves for life insurance policies subject to VM-20.   
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS 
Comment 
 
 
Response Several commentators said that definitions in the Valuation Manual  and the ASOP should be 
consistent. 
 
The reviewers agree that terms defined in the ASOP should conform to those in the Valuation 
Manual  and noted such in the introduction to section 2. The reviewers also updated the definitions 
to conform to those in the Valuation Manual .   
Section 2.6, Granularity (now section 2.5) 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator asked why the definition of gra nularity was inconsistent with the proposed 
Modeling  ASOP. Another commentator suggested language to streamline the definition. 
 The reviewers made changes to make the definition more consistent with the definition in the 
proposed Modeling  ASOP. 
Section 2.13, Principle-based Reserve (now section 2.12) 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator suggested that a clarifi cation was needed if the reference to Standard Valuation 
Law was intended to mean the standard valuation la w of the state of domicile, as opposed to the 
NAIC model  Standard Valuation Law . 
 
The intended reference was to the NAIC model Standard Valuation Law  (see section 1.1). The 
reviewers therefore revised th e definition to clarify this.  
Section 2.16, Relevant Exp erience (now section 2.15) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator asked why the definition of relevant experience was inconsistent with the 
definition in ASOP No. 25, Credibility Procedures . 
 
The reviewers note that the definition of relevant experience in ASOP No. 25 used another term 
neither defined in nor used in this ASOP and chose not to use the definition in ASOP No. 25.   
Section 2.19, Sensitivity Te sting (now section 2.18) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the definition of sensitivity testing refer to one or more 
assumptions rather than a single assumption. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that the ASOP more closely align with the VM-20 language requiring 
that model simplifications and scenario reductions both not materially differ from and not result in 
a less conservative reserve than a directly calculated value.  
 The reviewers agree and made changes throughout section 3 of the ASOP to bring the language 
into line with section 2 of VM-20. 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
29  Section 3.2, Minimum Net Premium Reserve (deleted) 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested removing the section on Net Premium Reserve because it offered no 
guidance. 
 The reviewers agree and removed the section. 
Section 3.3.1, Grouping (now section 3.2.1) 
Comment 
 
Response Two commentators suggested wording changes to the section on grouping for exclusion tests. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the changes. 
Section 3.3.2, Certification (now section 3.2.2) 
Comment  
 Response One commentator suggested having another section discussing actuarial demonstration for the 
stochastic exclusion test. 
 The reviewers believe that section 6 of VM-20 provides sufficient guidance and made no change. 
Comment   
 
Response One commentator suggested eliminating some of the discussion taken directly from VM-20 of 
when and how a certification by a qualified actuary could be used to satisfy the stochastic exclusion test. 
 
The reviewers disagree and believe the language in the ASOP from VM-20 provides the context for the guidance. Therefore, reviewers made no change. 
Section 3.3.2(a) (now section 3.2.2[a]) 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator suggested that the requirement to  consider the impact on reserves of future 
material interest rate or asset return volatility risk  leads the reader to believe that this is not a 
concern now.   
The reviewers believe the guidance is clear and made no change. 
Section 3.3.2(b) (now section 3.2.2[b]) 
Comment  
 Response One commentator suggested clarif ying the guidance around certification to satisfy the stochastic 
exclusion test.  
 The reviewers clarified the language. 
Section 3.4.1, Modeling (now section 3.3, Modeling Stocha stic and Deterministic Reserves)  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that multiple references to minimum reserves in section 3.4 were not 
correct and should have been references to deterministic or stochastic reserves. 
 
The reviewers agree and changed the references to de terministic reserves or stochastic reserves. In 
addition, the reviewers changed the text with respect  to overall margin (now section 3.3.2[f][4]) to 
clarify the intent of the ASOP. 
Comment  
 Response Two commentators thought that the reference to the cost of shareholder dividends could be 
confused with policyholder dividends or dividends on assets. 
 The reviewers disagree and made no change. 
Section 3.4.1(a), (Cash Flow Model) (now combined with section 3.3.1, Model Segments)  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator said that the text in 3.4(a)(1) was a restatement of VM-20. 
 
The reviewers agree and deleted some of the text that restated VM-20. 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
30  Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator thought that certain references in the text could be deleted because the items 
were included in the definition of Asset Segmentation Plan in the ASOP. 
 
The reviewers note that the subject text appears in  VM-20 and is necessary to set the context for 
the guidance, and did not make changes to this section of the ASOP. The reviewers deleted the 
definition of Asset Segmentation Plan as it is not needed. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the requirement to perform projections until no obligations 
remain was too stringent. 
 
The reviewers note that the subject text is a di rect quote from VM-20. However, in clarifying 
another section of the ASOP, the reviewers de leted the reference to this requirement.  
Section 3.4.1(b), Model Segments (now comb ined with section 3.3.1, Model Segments)  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested the reference to “asse t earned rates” should be a reference to “net 
asset earned rate.” 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator thought the ASOP might introduce an unintended restriction not in VM-20 to 
have separate segments for separate asset portfolios. 
 The reviewers modified the language to clarify the intent. 
Section 3.4.1(c), Model Validation (now section 3.3.1.2) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator was concerned about the level of review required for recent model updates. 
 
The reviewers modified the lang uage to clarify the intent.  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator thought the ASOP should be mo re specific with respect to how a dynamic 
validation should be constructed. 
 
The reviewers believe the specifics of the dynamic validation may vary depending on the block and modeling system and made no changes to the text. 
Comment   
 
Response One commentator thought that the actuary should be required to review a static valuation of 
inforce values, and the ASOP di d not require such review, but rather required the actuary to 
consider a static validation. 
 
The reviewers agree and modifi ed the language accordingly. 
Section 3.4.1(d)(1) (Liability Modeling Co nsiderations) (now section 3.3.3[a]) 
Comment 
  
Response Two commentators thought the language allowing the actuary to use demonstrations of the impact 
of liability grouping done as of a date other than the valuation date was too lenient.   
The reviewers agree and modified the language to bring it into line with section 2 of VM-20. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the phra se “prior as of date” was unclear. 
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language to bring it into line with section 2 of VM-20. 
Section 3.4.1(d)2 (Liability Modeling Co nsiderations) (now section 3.3.3[b]) 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator thought that this section did not provide guidance beyond what is provided in 
VM-20 and VM-31 and that the examples covered some but not all of the situations that are 
included in the Valuation Manual . 
 
The reviewers believe the ASOP provides additional guidance beyond the text of VM-20 and VM-31, and therefore did not make these changes. 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
31  Section 3.4.1(e), Use of Prior Period Data (now section 3.3.4) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the phra se “prior as of date” was unclear. 
 
The reviewers agree and made  changes to the text.  
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested eliminating the first tw o paragraphs of this section that paraphrase 
VM-31 D.11.g. 
 The reviewers believe that it is preferable to give  the regulatory context in which the guidance is 
offered. Therefore, the reviewers made no change in response to this comment.  
Section 3.4.2, Assumptions (now section 3.4, Assu mptions for Stochastic an d Deterministic Reserves) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested reference to the draft ASOP on Assumptions. 
 
The reviewers note that ASOPs do not include refere nces to draft standards, and therefore made no 
change. 
Comment   
Response One commentator suggested clarifying the use of sensitivity tests during the assumption setting 
process.  
The reviewers agree and clarified the language. 
Section 3.4.2(a), Mortality (now section 3.4.1) 
Comment 
 Response Several commentators suggested clarifying  the language around mortality trends. 
 The reviewers agree and clarified the language. 
Comment   
Response Two commentators recommended that lack of a mortality improvement assumption be labelled as 
an implicit margin.   
The reviewers clarified the reference to implicit margins.  
Section 3.4.2(b), Investment Experience (now section 3.4.2)  
Comment 
  
Response Two commentators pointed out that a reference was missing to the alternative investment strategy 
mentioned in VM-20 section 7.  
The reviewers added the following sentence: “The actuary should comply with the requirement in 
section 7 of VM-20 that the modeled reserve is not less than the reserve that would have been 
obtained by the alternative investment strategy.”  
Section 3.4.2(c)(1)(vi) (Policyholder Behavior) (now section 3.4.3[a][6]) 
Comment  
 Response One commentator pointed out redundancy in the guidance on scenario-dependent assumptions for 
policyholder behavior. 
 The reviewers modified the language to  address the commentator’s concern. 
Section 3.4.2(c)(2), Premium As sumptions (now section 3.4.3[b] , Premium Payment Assumptions) 
Comment 
 
Response Two commentators suggested that language around premium patterns be clarified. 
 
The reviewers agree and revised the paragraph. 
Section 3.4.2(d)(2), Applyi ng Recent Expense Experience  (now section 3.4.4[b]) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested new language for consideration of unusual expenditures. 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change. 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
32  Section 3.4.2(e), Taxes (now section 3.4.5) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested removing the sec tion on taxes because it duplicates VM-20. 
 
The reviewers believe the language included in th e ASOP provides clarity, and therefore made no 
change in response to this comment. 
Comment   
Response One commentator pointed out that both Federal and foreign income taxes should be excluded from 
reserve calculations.  
The reviewers agree and revised the language. 
Section 3.4.2(f), Determining Assumption Margins (now section 3.4.6) 
Comment  
  
Response One commentator pointed out that nonguaranteed elements are not assumptions, but management 
decisions, and asked for clarification on how to apply margins to this assumption. 
 The reviewers excluded nonguaran teed elements from the example in response to this comment.  
Comment 
 
 
  
Response One commentator pointed out that although mortality assumptions are highly prescribed, some of 
the ASOP guidance for other assumptions could be applied to the mortality assumption, and asked 
that language be changed to apply the guidance to the mortality assumption. 
 The reviewers agree and changed the language in 3.4.2(f)(1) to clarify that the guidance applies to 
nonprescribed mortality margins.  
Section 3.4.2(f)(2), Establishing  Margins (now section 3.4.6[b]) 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested that the ASOP refe rence the VM-31 requirem ent of estimating an 
aggregate margin in the deterministic reserves.  
The reviewers agree and added a sentence to this effect to section 3.4.2(f)(4) (now 3.3.2[f][4]).  
Section 3.4.2(f)(3), Sensitivity Testing (now section 3.4.6[c]) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator objected to the term “relatively insignificant” as applied to margins. 
 
The reviewers revised the language to “non-material impact.” 
Section 3.5.1, Stochastic and Determi nistic Reserves Under Reinsurance (now Stochastic and Deterministic 
Reserves Net of Reinsurance) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the ASOP more closely align with the VM-20 language regarding 
model simplifications and scenario reductions. 
 
The reviewers agree and made changes to bring the language into line with section 2 of VM-20. 
Section 3.5.2, Pre-Reinsura nce-Ceded Minimum Reserve  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that th e term “net premium reserve” be replaced by the defined term 
“minimum net premium reserve” in section 3.5.2. 
 
The reviewers deleted the definition and revised the language to be consistent with VM-20. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator requested clarification of when a hypothetical portfolio would be required. 
 
The reviewers revised the language to clarify when a hypothetical portfolio is required.  
Section 3.5.3, Credit for Reinsurance Ceded  
Comment  Response One commentator suggested a revision to language around credit for reinsurance. 
 The reviewers agree and made this change. 
ASOP No. 52—September 2017  
  
33  Section 3.7, Documentation  
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested streamlining the language around verification. 
 
The reviewers agree and modified the language.  
Comment 
 
  
Response  One commentator believed that verification that methods, models, assumptions, and controls meet 
the standards of the Valuation Manual  is part of a company's intern al control process, and should 
not be included in the PBR report.  
The reviewers note that the verifications are required by VM-G, but modified the language to take 
the commentator’s con cerns into account.  
Section 4, Communications and Disclosures
Comment 
  
Response  One commentator suggested that the qualified actuaries’ responsibilities spelled out in VM-G be 
detailed in the ASOP.  
The reviewers do not believe it is nece ssary to repeat this portion of the Valuation Manual  and 
therefore made no change.   
Section 4.2, PBR Actuarial Report  
Comment 
  
 
Response  One commentator said the language around using the work of the appointed actuary for the 
stochastic exclusion test was not strict enough, since the appointed actuary is not required to do cash flow testing. 
 
The reviewers moved the guidance from section 4.2 to section 3.3.2 (now section 3.2.2, 
Certification), and added language to say, “the actuary may rely upon an analysis performed for a 
different purpose that uses a set of scenarios which, based on the actuary’s professional judgement, adequately captures the interest ra te or asset return volatility risk.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 57  
  
 
 
 
Statements of Actuarial Opinion Not Based on an  
Asset Adequacy Analysis for Life Insurance, Annuity, or Health Insurance  
Reserves and Related Actuarial Items 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developed by the 
Actuarial Compliance Guideline No. 4 Task Force of the  
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
January 2023 
 
Doc. No. 208 
  

ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
ii 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
Transmittal Memorandum iii 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1  
1.1 Purpose 1  
1.2 Scope 1  
1.3 Cross References 1  
1.4 Effective Date 2  
 
Section 2. Definitions 2  
2.1 Subsequent Events 2  
 
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 2  
3.1 Intended Purpose and Intended Users of the Statement of Actuarial Opinion 2  
3.2 Exemption from Asset Adequacy Analysis 2  
3.3 Statement of Opinion 2  
3.4 Policy and Contract Provisions Affecting Reserves and Related Actuarial Items 3  
3.5 Methods of Determination 3  
3.6 Reinsurance 3  
3.7 Use of Data Predating the Valuation Date 3  
3.8 Subsequent Events 3  
3.9 Changes in Methods, Models, or Assumptions 3  
3.10 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others 3  
3.11 Opinions of Other Actuaries 4  
3.12 Documentation 4  
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 4  
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 4  
4.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 5  
 
APPENDIXES 
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 6  
Background 6  
Current Practices 7  
 
Appendix 2  9  
 
  
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
iii 
 January 2023 
 
TO: Members of Actuarial Organizations Governed by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons Interested in Statements of 
Actuarial Opinion Not Based on an Asset Adequacy Analysis for Life Insurance, 
Annuity, or Health Insurance Reserves and Related Actuarial Items 
 
FROM: Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ: Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 57, Statements of Actuarial Opinion 
Not Based on an Asset Adequacy Analysis for Life Insurance, Annuity, or Health 
Insurance Reserves and Related Actuarial Items 
 
This document contains ASOP No. 57, Statements of Actuarial Opinion Not Based on an Asset 
Adequacy Analysis for Life Insurance, Annuity, or Health Insurance Reserves and Related 
Actuarial Items .  
 
History of the Standard 
 
The ASB voted in April 1992 to expose a proposed actuarial standard of practice titled Statutory 
Statements of Opinion by Appointed Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers . The exposure draft 
covered both types of actuarial opinions required by the Standard Valuation Law  and the 1991 
version of the Actuarial Opinion Memorandum Regulation (Model Regulation): (1) the opinion 
under section 8 of the Model Regulation, which required an analysis of and an opinion about the 
adequacy of those assets that support the reserves to meet the company’s obligations; and (2) the 
opinion under section 7, which did not require an asset adequacy analysis.  
 
Letters of comment received, and discussions at an ASB public hearing on the draft in June 
1992, focused largely on the issue of whether the proposed standard appeared to impose an asset 
adequacy analysis or cash flow testing on the smaller companies exempted from such analysis 
under section 7. Some commentators expressed the view that such analyses could be imposed on 
the appointed actuaries for the exempted companies because of ASOP No. 14, When to Do Cash 
Flow Testing for Life and Health Insurance Companies . 
 
In 1993, the ASB adopted ASOP No. 22, Statutory Statements of Opinion Based on Asset 
Adequacy Analysis by Appointed Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers , which replaced Financial 
Reporting Recommendation No. 7, Statement of Actuarial Opinion for Life Insurance Company 
Statutory Annual Statements,  and No. 11, Statement of Actuarial Opinion for Interest-Indexed 
Universal Life Insurance Contracts , as guidance for opinions under section 8 of the Model 
Regulation. 
 
Prior to the adoption, there had been discussions about whether ASOP No. 22 should cover 
opinions under both section 7 and section 8 of the Model Regulation. The ASB decided to limit 
ASOP No. 22 to cover opinions required under only section 8 and adopted Actuarial Compliance 
Guideline (ACG) No. 4, Statutory Statements of Opinion Not Including an Asset Adequacy 
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
iv 
 Analysis by Appointed Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers , in October 1993 to provide 
guidance on opinions required under section 7.  
 
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the ASB reviewed all standards of practice related to cash flow 
testing. Portions of ASOP No. 14, When to Do Cash Flow Testing for Life and Health Insurance 
Companies , were incorporated into ASOP No. 7, Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty 
Insurer Cash Flows , and ASOP No. 22. In 2001, the ASB adopted the revised ASOP No. 7 and 
ASOP No. 22 and repealed ASOP No. 14.  
 
In December 2012, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) initially 
adopted the Valuation Manual , which sets forth the minimum reserve and related requirements 
for jurisdictions where the Standard Valuation Law , as amended by the NAIC in 2009, has been 
enacted. The Valuation Manual  took effect on January 1, 2017, pursuant to section 11 of the 
Standard Valuation Law . Requirements for the annual actuarial opinion and memorandum 
pursuant to section 3 of the Standard Valuation Law  are provided in “VM-30, Actuarial Opinion 
and Memorandum Requirements.” 
 
In response to these and other NAIC activities, the ASB decided to revise ASOP No. 22 in 2021. 
As ACG No. 4, the last remaining Actuarial Compliance Guideline, remained relevant for 
actuaries working for companies that receive an exemption from asset adequacy analysis, the 
ASB decided to convert ACG No. 4 into the standard format of an ASOP.   
 
Exposure Draft 
 
The exposure draft was issued in September 2022 with a comment deadline of January 15, 2023. 
No comment letters were received. Accordingly, no changes were made from the exposure draft 
to the final standard. 
 
The ASB voted in January 2023 to adopt this standard. 
 
  
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
v 
  
Actuarial Compliance Guideline (ACG) No. 4 Task Force 
 
Janice A. Duff, Chairperson 
Ashlee M. Borcan   Julian B. Levin 
Alice M. Fontaine   Eddie A. Mire 
Aaron J. Hodges   Cande J. Olsen 
 
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
 Gabriel Schiminovich, Chairperson 
Lisa S. Kuklinski  Matthew A. Monson 
Donna C. Megregian  Jeremy Starr 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Robert M. Damler, Chairperson 
Elizabeth K. Brill  David E. Neve  
Kevin M. Dyke  Christopher F. Noble  
Laura A. Hanson  Judy K. Stromback 
Richard A. Lassow  Patrick B. Woods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets standards for appropriate actuarial practice  
in the United States through the development and promulgation of Actuarial Standards of 
Practice (ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the procedures an actuary should follow when 
performing actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose when 
communicating the results of those services.  
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
1  PROPOSED ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
STATEMENTS OF ACTUARIAL OPINION NOT BASED ON AN 
ASSET ADEQUACY ANALYSIS FOR LIFE INSURANCE, ANNUITY, OR HEALTH 
INSURANCE RESERVES AND RELATED ACTUARIAL ITEMS  
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 
1.1 Purpose—This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP or standard) provides guidance to 
actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect to providing a statement of 
actuarial opinion not based on an asset adequacy analysis for life insurance, annuity, or 
health insurance reserves and related actuarial items, pursuant to applicable law (statutes, 
regulations, and other legally binding authority). 
 
1.2 Scope This standard applies to actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect 
to providing a statement of actuarial opinion for life insurance, annuity, or health insurance 
reserves and related actuarial items that are within the scope of the Statement of Actuarial 
Opinion, NAIC Life and Accident & Health/Fraternal Annual Statement (Blue Book), 
when the statement is prepared to comply with applicable law and is not based on an asset 
adequacy analysis because of an exemption. 
 
If the statement of actuarial opinion encompasses health insurance liabilities, ASOP No. 
28, Statements of Actuarial Opinion Regarding Health Insurance Assets and Liabilities , 
may also apply. If the statement of actuarial opinion includes reinsurance, ASOP No. 11, 
Treatment of Reinsurance or Similar Risk Transfer Programs Involving Life Insurance, 
Annuities, or Health Benefit Plans in Financial Reports , may also apply.  
 
This standard does not apply to actuaries when performing services with respect to 
providing statements of actuarial opinion based on asset adequacy analysis that are subject 
to ASOP No. 22, Statements of Actuarial Opinion Based on Asset Adequacy Analysis for 
Life Insurance, Annuity, or Health Insurance Reserves and Other Liabilities . 
 
If a conflict exists between this standard and applicable law, the actuary should comply 
with applicable law. If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in 
order to comply with applicable law, or for any other reason the actuary deems appropriate, 
the actuary should refer to section 4.  
 
1.3 Cross References—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the originally referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate.  
 
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
2  1.4 Effective Date This standard is effective for all statements of actuarial opinion covered 
by the scope of this ASOP issued on or after June 15, 2023 . 
 
Section 2. Definitions 
 
The definition below is defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice and appears in bold 
throughout the ASOP. 
 
2.1 Subsequent Events Material events that occur after the valuation date and before the date 
the statement of actuarial opinion is signed. 
 
 
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 
3.1 Intended Purpose and Intended Users of the Statement of Actuarial Opinion—The actuary 
should identify the intended purpose and intended users of the statement of actuarial 
opinion. For example, the intended purpose may be to satisfy the requirements for such an 
opinion under the NAIC Life and Accident & Health/Fraternal Annual Statement (Blue 
Book), and the intended users may be the company and its regulators.  
 
3.2 Exemption from Asset Adequacy Analysis Eligibility for an exemption from submitting 
a statement of actuarial opinion based on an asset adequacy analysis is determined using 
criteria specified in applicable law. The actuary should confirm that the eligibility criteria 
have been met. Such confirmation may include a dialogue with the state regulator . The 
actuary should maintain appropriate documentation indicating eligibility for the 
exemption.  In addition, the actuary should make reasonable efforts to determine that no 
requirement for an asset adequacy analysis has been triggered by a specific request from 
the domiciliary insurance department. A written statement from a responsible officer of the 
company confirming that no specific request has been received will be deemed to satisfy 
this requirement. 
 
3.3 Statement of Opinion—The actuary should include in the opinion a statement that the 
reserves and related actuarial items meet the minimum standards of the state in which the 
opinion is filed. The actuary should include in the opinion whether the opinion is qualified, 
adverse, or inconclusive and provide the underlying reasons. 
 
The actuary should list in the statement of actuarial opinion the reserves and related 
actuarial items on which the actuary expresses an opinion. The form, content, and 
recommended language of the statement of actuarial opinion may be specified by 
applicable law.  
 
The actuary should be familiar and comply with the requirements for reserves and related 
actuarial items of the insurance laws of each state in which the opinion is filed. The actuary 
should maintain documentation concerning compliance with the requirements. 
 
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
3  3.4 Policy and Contract Provisions Affecting Reserves and Related Actuarial Items—The 
actuary should confirm that the policy and contract provisions affecting the reserves and 
related actuarial items have been taken into account. For example, these policy and contract 
provisions may include any guarantees, conversion and other rights, and nonforfeiture and 
other benefits.  
 
3.5 Determination of Reserves and Related Actuarial Items—When the determination of 
reserves and related actuarial items is prescribed by law, the actuary should confirm that 
the prescribed methods and assumptions are taken into account. 
  
 When the determination of reserves and related actuarial items is not prescribed by law 
(such as the estimation of life and health unpaid claim liabilities), the actuary should 
confirm that appropriate methods and assumptions were used to establish reserves and 
related actuarial items. For example, such assumptions may include mortality or morbidity 
improvement, the level of any margins needed to reflect provision for uncertainty in an 
estimate, and appropriate discount rates.  
 
3.6 Reinsurance—When taking into account the effect of reinsurance on the statement of 
actuarial opinion, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 11. In the case where a company 
has ceded all of a particular block of business, the actuary should determine whether 
provisions for any residual or contingent obligations of the ceding company should be 
established. 
 
3.7 Use of Data Predating the Valuation Date—When reserves and other actuarial items are 
based on data predating the valuation date, the actuary should take into account the 
reasonableness of the use of such prior period data and whether any material events have 
occurred prior to the valuation date that would invalidate that use.  
 
3.8 Subsequent Events The actuary should make a reasonable effort to be informed about 
subsequent events . 
 
3.9  Changes in Methods, Models, or Assumptions—If the methods, models, or assumptions 
supporting the reserves and related actuarial items differ from those in the prior statement 
of actuarial opinion, the actuary should consider quantifying the impacts of these changes. 
The actuary should determine whether regulatory approval is required prior to changing 
methods or assumptions for any reserves and related actuarial items. 
 
The use of new methods, models, or assumptions for new segments of  reserves and 
related actuarial items (for example, a new line of business or product) is not a change 
within the meaning of this section. 
 
310 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others—When relying on data or other 
information supplied by others, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 23, Data Quality , 
and ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications , for guidance.  
 
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
4  3.11 Opinions of Other Actuaries  The opining actuary should form an overall opinion without 
claiming reliance on the opinions of other actuaries.  
 
3.12  Documentation—In addition to the documentation requirements in section 3, the actuary 
should prepare and retain documentation to support compliance with the requirements of 
section 3 and the disclosure requirements of section 4. The actuary should prepare such 
documentation in a form such that another actuary qualified in the same practice area could 
assess the reasonableness of the actuary’s work. The amount, form, and detail of such 
documentation should be based on the professional judgment of the actuary and may vary 
with the complexity and purpose of the actuarial services. In addition, the actuary should 
refer to ASOP No. 41 for guidance related to the retention of file material other than that 
which is to be disclosed under section 4. 
 
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 
 
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report—When issuing any actuarial report within the 
scope of this standard, including statements of actuarial opinion, the actuary should refer 
to ASOP Nos. 11, 23, 28, and 41, as applicable. In particular, consistent with the intended 
purpose and intended users of the actuarial report, the actuary should disclose the 
following, as applicable: 
 
a. the intended purpose and intended users (see section 3.1); 
 
b. the basis for determining eligibility for an exemption from submitting a statement 
of actuarial opinion based on an asset adequacy analysis (see section 3.2); 
 
c. a statement that the reserves and related actuarial items meet the minimum 
standards of the state in which the opinion is filed, or whether the opinion is 
qualified, adverse, or inconclusive (see section 3.3); 
 
d. the methods and assumptions for determining reserves and related actuarial items 
(see section 3.5);  
 
e. the impact of reinsurance on the statement of actuarial opinion (see section 3.6); 
 
f. the use of any prior period data underlying the reserves and related actuarial items 
and whether any material events have occurred prior to the valuation date that 
would invalidate the use of that data (see section 3.7); 
 
g. any subsequent events  of which the actuary is aware (see section 3.8). 
 
h. any material changes in the methods, models, or assumptions from those used in 
the prior statement of actuarial opinion or if the methods, models, or assumptions 
used in the prior statement of actuarial opinion are unknown (see section 3.9); 
 
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
5  i. the extent of reliance on data or other information supplied by others (see section 
3.10); and 
 
4.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report—The actuary should also include 
disclosures in accordance with ASOP No. 41 in an actuarial report for the following 
circumstances:  
 
a.  if any material assumption or method was prescribed by applicable law; 
 
b.  if the actuary states reliance on other sources and thereby disclaims responsibility 
for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; 
and 
 
c.  if in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary has deviated materially from 
the guidance of this standard. 
  
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
6  Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 
Note: This appendix is provided for informational purposes and is not part of the standard of 
practice. 
 
Background 
 
In 1975, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) began requiring that a 
statement of actuarial opinion on reserves and related actuarial items be included in the annual 
statement filed by life and health insurance companies. In response to this requirement, the 
American Academy of Actuaries promulgated Financial Reporting Recommendation No. 7, 
Statement of Actuarial Opinion for Life Insurance Company Statutory Annual Statements , setting 
forth the actuary’s professional responsibilities in providing such an opinion. 
 
The form and content of this actuarial opinion, as specified in the instructions to the annual 
statement, dealt specifically with reserves and did not explicitly address the adequacy of the 
assets supporting these reserves and other liabilities to meet the obligations of the company. 
Although not explicitly required to do so by the opinion or by existing professional standards, 
some actuaries began to analyze the adequacy of assets in forming their opinions. In addition, 
when the state of New York adopted the 1980 amendments to the Standard Valuation Law , it 
established an optional valuation basis for annuities, permitting lower reserves provided that an 
asset adequacy analysis supported the actuarial opinion with respect to such reserves. 
 
The type of asset adequacy analysis most widely used by actuaries is multi-scenario cash flow 
testing. To guide actuaries choosing to use this technique, the Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
adopted ASOP No. 7, then titled Performing Cash Flow Testing for Insurers , in October 1988. In 
addition, in July 1990, the ASB adopted ASOP No. 14, When to Do Cash Flow Testing for Life 
and Health Insurance Companies , to provide guidance in determining whether to do cash flow 
testing in forming a professional opinion or recommendation. 
 
In December 1990, the NAIC amended the Standard Valuation Law , and, in June 1991, the 
NAIC adopted the Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Regulation (AOMR) . These actions had 
the effect of moving the requirement for the statement of actuarial opinion from the annual 
statement instructions into the model law itself and provided detailed instructions for the form 
and content of the opinion and the newly required supporting memorandum. The most significant 
changes made by the NAIC in the 1991 AOMR were that companies were required to name an 
appointed actuary, and, for companies subject to section 8 of the AOMR, statements of actuarial 
opinion on reserve and other liability adequacy were required to be based on an asset adequacy 
analysis described in the supporting memorandum. The asset adequacy analysis required by the 
regulation had to conform to the standards of practice promulgated by the ASB. 
 
For companies subject to section 7, an actuarial opinion stating that the reserves and related 
actuarial items had been calculated in accordance with the Standard Valuation Law  and 
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
7  supporting regulations was required by the 1991 AOMR. Section 7 of the 1991 AOMR did not 
require an opinion on reserve adequacy.  
 
In 1993, the ASB adopted ASOP No. 22, Statutory Statements of Opinion Based on Asset 
Adequacy Analysis by Appointed Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers , which replaced Financial 
Reporting Recommendation No. 7 and No. 11, Statement of Actuarial Opinion for Interest-
Indexed Universal Life Insurance Contracts , as guidance for section 8 opinions.  
 
The ASB also adopted Actuarial Compliance Guideline (ACG) No. 4, Statutory Statements of 
Opinion Not Including an Asset Adequacy Analysis by Appointed Actuaries for Life or Health 
Insurers, in late 1993 to provide guidance for section 7 opinions.  
 
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the ASB reviewed all standards of practice related to cash flow 
testing. Portions of ASOP No. 14 were incorporated into ASOP Nos. 7 and 22. In 2001, the ASB 
adopted the revised ASOP Nos. 7 and 22 and repealed ASOP No. 14. 
 
Starting in 2001, the model AOMR adopted by the NAIC required all actuarial opinions to be 
based on asset adequacy analysis. Several states allowed for single-state exemptions in their 
adoption of the AOMR. As a result, ACG No. 4 remains relevant.  
 
In December 2012, the NAIC initially adopted the Valuation Manual , which sets forth the 
minimum reserve and related requirements for jurisdictions where the Standard Valuation Law , 
as amended by the NAIC in 2009, has been enacted. The Valuation Manual  took effect on 
January 1, 2017, pursuant to section 11 of the Standard Valuation Law . Requirements for the 
annual actuarial opinion and memorandum pursuant to section 3 of the Standard Valuation Law  
are provided in “VM-30: Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Requirements.” VM-30 also 
recognizes the existence of single-state exemptions from asset adequacy analysis.  
 
In response to these and other NAIC activities, the ASB decided to revise ASOP No. 22 in 2021.  
As ACG No. 4, the last remaining Actuarial Compliance Guideline, remained relevant for 
actuaries working for companies that receive an exemption from asset adequacy analysis, the 
ASB decided to convert ACG No. 4 into the standard format of an ASOP.   
 
 
Current Practices 
 
Statements of actuarial opinion on reserves and related items have been provided since 1975, and 
practice regarding the basic elements of the opinion is well established.  However, exemptions 
from asset adequacy analysis are no longer the norm in issuing actuarial opinions. Most 
exemptions from asset adequacy analysis are for companies licensed in a single state.  
 
Eligibility for an exemption from submitting a statement of actuarial opinion based on an asset 
adequacy analysis is determined using criteria specified in applicable state law or stipulated by 
the state regulator. Typically, the actuary ensures that the eligibility criteria have been met by 
having a dialogue with the state regulator. In addition, the actuary typically makes reasonable 
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
8  efforts to determine that no requirement for an asset adequacy analysis has been triggered by a 
specific request from the domiciliary insurance department. 
  
ASOP No. 57—Doc. No. 208 
9   
Appendix 2 
Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses  
An exposure draft of the proposed new ASOP on Statements of Actuarial Opinion Not Based 
on an Asset Adequacy Analysis for Life Insurance, Annuity, or Health Insurance Reserves and 
Related Actuarial Items , was issued in September 2022 with a comment deadline of January 
15, 2023. No comment letters were received. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 24 
 
 
 
Compliance with the  
NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations  
Model Regulation 
 
 
Revised Edition  
  
Developed by the 
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 24 of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
  
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
December 2016 
 
 
Doc. No. 184   

ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
ii 
  
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S 
 
 
Transmittal Memorandum  iv 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 1.2 Scope 1 1.3 Cross References 2 1.4 Effective Date 2 
 Section 2. Definitions 2 
2.1 Actual Experience 2 2.2 Currently Payable Scale 2 2.3 Disciplined Current Scale 2 2.4 Experience Factor 2 2.5 Experience Factor Class 2 2.6 Illustrated Scale 2 2.7 Illustration Actuary 2 2.8 Nonguaranteed Element 2 2.9 Nonguaranteed Element Framework 3 
 Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3 
3.1 Regulatory Requirements 3 
3.2 Appointment as Illustration Actuary 3 
3.3 Illustrated Scale Requirements 3 
3.3.1 Currently Payable Scale 3 3.3.2 Disciplined Current Scale 3 3.3.3 Interest Credited Rate 3 
3.4 Developing the Disciplined Current Scale 3 
3.4.1 Assumptions Underlying the Disciplined Current Scale 3 
3.4.2 Relationship of Actual Experien ce to Disciplined Current Scale 7 
3.5 Requirements for Self-Support 7 3.6 Requirements to Prevent Laps e-Supported Illustrations 8 
3.7 Illustrations on Policies In Force One Year or More 8 3.8 Changes in Practice 9 3.9 Reliance on Data or Other In formation Supplied by Others 10 
3.10 Documentation 10 
 Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 10 
4.1 Certification 10 4.2 Notice of Error in Certification 11 4.3 Disclosures 11 
 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
iii 
 APPENDIXES 
Appendix 1 Background and Current Practices 12 
Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses 14 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
iv 
 December 2016 
 
TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Pers ons Interested in Compliance with the 
NAIC Life Insurance Illust rations Model Regulation 
 FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 SUBJ: Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 24 
 This document contains the final ve rsion of a revision of ASOP No. 24, Compliance with the 
NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation . 
 Background 
 The ASB adopted ASOP No. 24, Compliance with the NAIC Life Illustrations Model Regulation , 
in 1995. Since the promulgation of the original standard, life insuranc e product innovation has 
continued. In 2007, ASOP No. 24 was revised to be consistent with  the current ASOP format and 
to update and reflect current, appr opriate actuarial practi ces with respect to illustrations prepared 
in compliance with the Life Insurance Illustra tions Model Regulation (Model ). In 2015, the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners  released Actuarial Guideline 49 (AG 49) to 
clarify certain requirements of the Model  related to policies with inde x-based interest credits and 
further amended AG 49 in September 2016. The ASOP was revised to reflect the changes 
effected through AG 49, to clarify cer tain guidance, and to be consistent with the current style and 
format used for ASOPs.  
Exposure Draft 
 
An exposure draft of this revision was issued in  July 2016 with a comment deadline of September 
30, 2016. Five comment letters were received an d considered in making changes that were 
reflected in this final revised standard. For a summary of the i ssues contained in the exposure 
draft comment letters and the responses, see appendix 2. 
 There were no significant change s from the exposure draft.  
 The ASB thanks everyone who took time to contribute comments and suggestions on the 
exposure draft.   The ASB voted in December 2016 to adopt this standard. 
  
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
v 
 Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 24  
 
David Y. Rogers, Chairperson 
Jeremy A. Bill   Joseph N. Fick Delmer F. Borah  Brian R. Lessing Seth J. Detert   Michael L. Yanacheak Gayle L. Donato       
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
David Y. Rogers, Chairperson 
David A. Brentlinger  Anthony J. Tokarz 
   James B. Milholland  Matthew J. Wininger    Henry W. Siegel   Candace J. Woods  
 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Maryellen J. Coggins, Chairperson 
Beth E. Fitzgerald  Barbara L. Snyder Christopher S. Carlson Kathleen A. Riley  Darrell D. Knapp  Frank Todisco Cande J. Olsen   Ross A. Winkelman  
 
 
            
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets standard s for appropriate actuarial practice in the 
United States through the development and promul gation of Actuarial Standards of Practice 
(ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the procedures  an actuary should follow when performing 
actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose  when communicating the results 
of those services.  
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
1  
ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF  PRACTICE NO. 24 
  
COMPLIANCE WITH THE  
NAIC LIFE INSURANCE  ILLUSTRATIONS 
MODEL REGULATION 
  
STANDARD OF PRACTICE
 
  
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 1.1 Purpose—This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP) provides guidan ce to actuaries when 
performing professional services pursuant to applicable law based on the National 
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Life Insurance Illustrations Model 
Regulation  (Model ) and related NAIC actuarial gu idelines or when performing 
professional services with respect to illustratio ns represented to be in accordance with the 
Model . 
 1.2 Scope—This standard applies to actuaries when performing professional services to 
provide or support an actuarial certification pursuan t to an applicable law based on the 
Model . The Model  applies to illustrations, both for proposals and in-force policies, as 
described in the Model , for group and individual  life insurance othe r than variable life 
insurance. The Model  does not apply to individual and group annuity contracts, credit life 
insurance, and life insurance policies with no illustrated death benefits on any individual 
exceeding $10,000. NAIC Actuarial Guideline 49 (AG 49) is related to the Model  and 
applies to certain life insurance policies that are subject to the Model  and that provide 
interest credits linked to an  external index or indices. 
 
This standard applies to actuaries when perf orming professional servic es with respect to 
illustrations in the absence of applicable regulations if the illustrations are to be 
represented as being in  accordance with the Model . 
 
This standard does not apply to actuaries when performing profe ssional services with 
respect to the determination of nonguaranteed elements  payable. Determination of these 
items, as well as illustrations not included in the scope of this  ASOP, are covered by 
ASOP No. 2, Nonguaranteed Charges or Benefits for Life Insurance Policies and Annuity 
Contracts , or ASOP No. 15, Dividends for Individual Par ticipating Life Insurance, 
Annuities, and Disability Insurance . 
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with 
applicable law (statutes, regul ations, and other lega lly binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4. 
 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
2 1.3 Cross References—When this standard refers  to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the origina lly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date—This standard is effective fo r actuarial services performed on or after 
April 30, 2017. 
  
Section 2. Definitions 
 The terms below are defined for use in this actu arial standard of practi ce. Definitions 2.2, 2.3, 2.6, 
2.7, and 2.8 are intended to conform to those in the Model . 
 2.1 Actual Experience—Historical resu lts and trends in those results.  
 
2.2 Currently Payable Scale—A scale of nonguaranteed elements  in effect for a policy form 
as of the preparation date of the illustration or declared to become effective within the next 
95 days. 
 2.3 Disciplined Current Scale—A scale of nonguaranteed elements , certified annually by the 
illustration actuary , constituting a limit on illustrations cu rrently being illustrated by an 
insurer that is reasonably based on actual recent historical ex perience and that satisfies the 
requirements set forth in the Model. 
 
2.4 Experience Factor—A value or se t of values that represents the actual experience  of a 
policy form. Examples of experience factors  include rates of mortality, expense, 
investment income, termination, and taxes. 
 2.5 Experience Factor Class—A group of policies for which nonguaranteed elements  are 
determined by using common numeri cal values of a particular experience factor . 
 2.6 Illustrated Scale—A scale of nonguaranteed elements  currently being illustrated that is 
not more favorable to the polic yholder than the lesser of the disciplined current scale  or 
the currently payable scale . 
 2.7 Illustration Actuary—An actuary who is appoint ed in accordance w ith the requirements 
set forth in the Model . 
 2.8 Nonguaranteed Element—Any element within an  insurance policy that  affects policy costs 
or values that is not guaranteed  or not determined at issue. A nonguaranteed element  
may provide a more favorable value to the polic yholder than that guara nteed at the time of 
issue of the policy. Examples of nonguaranteed elements  include policy dividends, 
excess interest credits, mortality charges, e xpense charges, indeterminate premiums, and 
participation rates and maximum rates of re turn for indexed life insurance products.  
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
3  
2.9 Nonguaranteed Element Framework—The stru cture by which the insurer determines 
nonguaranteed elements . This includes the assignment of policies to experience factor 
classes , the method of allocating income and costs,  and the structure of the formulas or 
other methods of using experience factors . For participating policies this would be the 
dividend framework defined in ASOP No. 15. For life policies within the scope of ASOP 
No. 2, the nonguaranteed element framework  would include the concepts of policy 
class, determination policy, and anticipated experience factors . 
  
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 3.1 Regulatory Requirements—The Model  contains detailed in structions, technical 
requirements, and prohibitions regarding many aspects of illustrations. Actuaries 
providing professional services within the scope  of this standard should be familiar with 
the Model,  AG 49, any applicable state law based on the Model  (including state 
variations), and this standard.  
 3.2 Appointment as Illustration Actuary— Before accepting an appointment as an illustration 
actuary , the actuary should determine that he or  she meets the qualifications described in 
the Qualification Standards for Ac tuaries Issuing Statements of  Actuarial Opinion in the 
United States . The appointment should be in writing a nd should describe the scope of the 
illustration actuary’s  responsibilities and establish the effective date. Acceptance of or 
withdrawal from the position s hould also be in writing. 
 3.3 Illustrated Scale Requirements—The actuary should ensure that the illustrated scale  
meets the requirements imposed by the Model  as follows. 
 3.3.1 Currently Payable Scale—The illustrated scale  must not be more favorable to the 
policyholder than the currently payable scale  at any duration.  
 
3.3.2 Disciplined Current Scale—The illustrated scale  must be no more favorable to the 
policyholder than the disciplined current scale  at any duration.  
 
3.3.3 Interest Credited Rate—For policies with interest credits linked to an external 
index or indices, the interest credited rate for the illustrated scale  for each indexed 
account shall be limited in accordance with AG 49.  
 3.4 Developing the Disciplined Current Scale— The actuary should cons ider the following 
when developing the disciplined current scale : 
 
3.4.1 Assumptions Underlying the Disciplined  Current Scale—The actuary should use 
experience as analyzed within the insurer’s nonguaranteed element framework  
when setting experience factors  underlying the disciplined current scale . To the 
extent actual experience  is determinable, available, and credible, the actuary 
should use actual experience  when setting experience factors  underlying the 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
4 disciplined current scale . When such suitable data are lacking, experience 
factors  should be derived in a reasona ble and appropriate manner from actual 
experience  of other similar classes of busin ess. Similar classes may be found 
within the same company, may be found in other companies, or may be from other 
sources, in that order of preference. When determining the extent to which actual 
experience  is credible, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 25, Credibility 
Procedures . As required by the Model , the experience factors  underlying the 
disciplined current scale  may not include any projected trends of improvement 
nor any assumed improvements in expe rience beyond the effec tive date of the 
illustrated scale , except as provided in section 3.8.  
 
The actuary should consider the foll owing when setting assumptions:  
 
a. Investment Return—The experience factor  used for investment income 
(the investment return factor) underlying the disciplined current scale  
should be reasonably based on recent act ual investment experience, net of 
default costs, of the assets  supporting the policy block.  
 If interest credits are linked to an external index or indices, then the 
investment return factor is sensitive to business or economic cycles. In such 
cases, the actuary should consider an appropriate time frame commensurate 
with such cycles and the characteristic s of the underlying index or indices 
in determining recent actual experience . When determining the investment 
return factor for policies within th e scope of AG 49, actuaries should 
comply with limitations imposed on the assumed earned interest rate underlying the disciplined current scale . 
 
The actuary should have a reasonable basis for allocating investment income to policies, whether using the portfolio, segmentation, investment generation, or any other method. The actuary should develop the investment return factors using the sa me method that is used to allocate 
investment income to policies. The inve stment return factors may be net of 
investment expenses or, alternatively, investment expenses may be treated 
separately as expenses.   The actuary should use procedures that  have a reasonable theoretical basis 
for determining the investment return factors. In determining the investment return factors, the actuary  should reflect the insurer’s actual 
practice for nonguaranteed elements  with respect to realized and 
unrealized capital gains and losses, i nvestment hedges, policy loans, and 
other investment items.  
 
b. Mortality—The actuary should base the mortality experience factors  on 
the insurer’s mortality experience, if cr edible, adjusted for risk class. In 
setting mortality experience factors , the actuary should consider credible 
variations by age, gender, duration, marketing method, plan, size of policy, 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
5 policy provisions, risk cla ss, and other items (or a combination thereof) 
consistent with the insurer’s structure of mortality experience factor 
classes . To the extent that the insurer’s actual experience  is not 
sufficiently credible, the actuary s hould consider using other credible 
industry mortality experience, appropr iately modified to reflect the 
insurer’s underwriting practices. If no credible industry mortality experience is available,  the actuary should use professional judgment in 
modifying other sources of informa tion (for example, general population 
mortality tables) in order to obtain the mortality assumption.  
 
c.  Persistency—The actuary should ba se the premium continuation and policy 
persistency rates on the insurer’s actual experience , if credible, for this or 
similar policy forms. The actuary shoul d consider credible variations by 
age, gender, duration, marketing me thod, plan, size of policy, policy 
provisions, risk class, an d other items (or a combination thereof) consistent 
with the insurer’s stru cture of persistency experience factor classes . To the 
extent that the insurer’s recent experience is not credible, the actuary should consider using other credible i ndustry experience such as that from 
LIMRA, appropriately m odified to reflect the actuary’s professional 
judgment regarding differences between the policy form and the basis for the industry experience.    
d. Direct Sales Expenses—The actuary  should reflect agent commissions, 
overrides, and other direct compen sation determined by formula or 
incurred as a consequence of sales in a manner consistent with new business activities that generate the cost and are excluded from the expense 
factors given in sections (e )(1), (2), and (3) below. 
 
e. All Other Expenses—As described in the Model , the actuary should 
consider whether the minimum expenses to  be used in the calculation of the 
disciplined current scale  for all policy forms during the certification year 
are based on sections (1), (2), or (3) below and are subject to the criteria that follow them: 
 
1. Fully Allocated—Unit expenses re flecting total expenses recently 
incurred by the insurer when applied to both in force or newly issued policies are considered fu lly allocated. Some  expenses are 
direct in that they can be specifically related to a particular policy form. Other expenses, such as gene ral overhead cost s, are indirect. 
The actuary should charge direct ex penses to the groups of policies 
generating the related costs. Indi rect expenses should be fully 
allocated using reasonable principles of expense allocation. Nonrecurring costs, such as syst ems development costs, may be 
spread over a reasonable number of years (for example, system lifetime) in determining the allocable expenses for a particular year. 
 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
6 2. Marginally Allocated—Marginall y allocated expenses are unit 
expenses calculated in a manner similar to fully allocated unit expenses except that indirect expenses, such as corporate overhead and general advertising, are not allocated to the policy forms. 
 
3. Generally Recognized Expense Table (GRET)—GRET unit 
expenses are obtained from an  industry expense study based on 
fully allocated expenses repres enting a significant portion of 
insurance companies and approved for use by the NAIC or by the 
commissioner.  
 
If no GRET is approve d and available, the Model  requires the use of fully 
allocated expenses. If a GRET is approved and available, the Model  allows 
the use of either a GRET or fully allocated expenses. The Model  permits 
the use of marginally allocated expenses only to the extent that they generate aggregate expenses that are at  least as large as those generated by 
a GRET.  
 
The actuary should make the comparis on and choice of expense factor 
bases in the aggregate for all policy fo rms. The actuary should use the same 
unit expense basis for all policy forms tested. For example, the actuary should not use marginal expenses for one policy form and fully allocated 
expenses for another policy form. On ce the actuary selects the unit expense 
basis, the actuary should use that ba sis for the entire certification year. 
When calculating unit expenses, the act uary should select average policy 
size and volume of sales assumptions that are appropriate for the policy 
form. 
 
f. Taxes—The actuary should reflect all cash flows arising from applicable 
taxes. Income taxes should be recognized  in accordance with their impact 
by duration in the development of the disciplined current scale . Non-
income taxes that are classified as investment taxes may be treated as a deduction from the investment return or may be treated separately. Other 
categories of taxes, such as premium taxes or employment taxes, may be 
handled separately or included in th e category of all other expenses, as 
outlined in section 3.4.1(e) above. 
 
Details of taxation vary widely, de pending on the application of law and 
regulation in various ju risdictions. The actuary should consider the 
insurer’s actual practices  for allocating taxes for nonguaranteed elements  
in determining the tax experience factor . 
 
g. Changes in Methodology—When an insurer changes its methodology in 
determining nonguaranteed elements  (for example, changing from 
portfolio rate methodology to a new money rate methodology or adding a 
new underwriting class), the actuar y should appropriately modify 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
7 assumptions underlying the disciplined current scale  to reflect the new 
methodology.  
 h. Other Lines of Business—If other lines of business are considered 
investments of the illustrated block of  business, the actuary should consider 
whether cash flows originating in such lines are recognized in the 
assumptions underlying the disciplined current scale . In deciding whether 
and how to reflect these cash flows, the actuary should consider the time 
horizon of the investment/investor re lationship and the insurer’s actual 
practice for reflecting these cash flows in determining nonguaranteed 
elements . 
 
3.4.2 Relationship of Actual Experience to  Disciplined Current Scale—The actuary 
should select assumptions underlying an insurer’s disciplined current scale  that 
logically and reas onably relate to actual experience  as reflected within the 
insurer’s nonguaranteed element framework . The actuary should reflect changes 
in experience once changes have been de termined to be significant and ongoing.  
 
Actual experience  may exhibit improvements from year to year. As required by 
the Model , such trends in improvement may no t be assumed to continue into the 
future beyond the effective date of the disciplined current scale  underlying the 
illustration. 
 
If trends indicate that significant and continuing deterioration in an experience 
factor  has occurred or, in the actuary’s prof essional judgment, is likely to occur 
between the date of the experience study and the effective date of the disciplined 
current scale  underlying the illustration, the actuary should re cognize such 
deterioration in determining the assumptions to be used. 
 
When an insurer introduces a change in underwriting practice (for example, adding 
a new underwriting class) that is not exp ected to change the insured population, the 
actuary should divide the actual experience  into the new underwriting classes in 
such a way that actual experience  is reproduced in the aggregate. 
 3.5 Requirements for Self-Support—The Model  requires every policy form illustrated by an 
insurer to be self -supporting according to the assu mptions underlying the insurer’s 
disciplined current scale . This requirement applies to the illustration of policies in force 
for less than one year.  
 
The Model requires the following self-support test. At every illustrated point in time 
starting with the fifteenth policy anniversar y (with the twentieth policy anniversary for 
second-or-later-to-die policies), the accumulate d value of all policy cash flows, when 
using experience assumptions underlying the disciplined current scale , should be equal 
to or greater than the illustra ted policyholder value, i.e., the cash surrender values and any 
other illustrated benefit amounts available at  the policyholder’s el ection. When policies 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
8 expire according to their terms prior to 15 years (20 years for second-or-later-to-die 
policies), the illustrated scale  should be self-supporting at  the point of  expiration. 
 
Each illustration reflects underwriting classifi cation, as well as certain factors that are 
subject to policyholder choice.  The underwriting classificati on includes factors such as 
age, gender, and risk class.  Policyholder choices reflecte d in the preparation of an 
illustration include, but are not limited to, th e size of policy, premium payment pattern, 
dividend option, coverage ri ders, and policy loans. 
 
When performing the self-support test for a policy form, the actuary may test the 
underwriting classification and policyholder choice factors in aggregate if, in the actuary’s 
professional judgment and subject to the lim itations of AG 49, such combinations would 
be appropriate. If testing is done in the aggregate, the actu ary should select assumptions 
for the distribution between underwriting classe s and policyholder choices that are based 
on actual experience , if available, recognizing possible shifts in distribution toward any 
portions of the business that do not meet the self-support test in  their own right.  
 When performing the self-support test on policy fo rms with 1) interest credits linked to an 
external index or indices and 2) more than one available in dexed account, actuaries must 
comply with the limitations on aggregation of indexed accounts imposed by AG 49, if 
applicable. 
 3.6 Requirements to Prevent Laps e-Supported Illustrations—The Model  prohibits illustration 
of nonguaranteed elements  in policies that are deemed  to be lapse-supported and 
establishes a lapse-support te st to demonstrate compliance with this requirement. The 
lapse-support test requires that the policy fo rm in question be self-supporting under the 
same assumptions and with the same level of  aggregation as described in section 3.5, 
changing only the persistency assumption. The modified persistency rate assumption will 
use the persistency rates underlying the disciplined current scale  for the first five policy 
years and 100% policy persiste ncy thereafter. In performing the lapse-support test for a 
policy form, the actuary should assume that benefits that are conditional only upon policy 
continuation will be provided to all policies in force at the end of year five and surviving 
to the date of such benefits. For policy form s that provide benefits  that are conditional 
upon certain premium payment patterns, the actu ary should consider whether all policies 
in force to the end of year five  will qualify for such benefits.  
 
As stated in the Model , policy forms that can never deve lop nonforfeiture values, such as 
certain term coverages, are exempt  from the lapse-support test. The Model  requires that 
these policy forms pass the self-support requirement.  
 
3.7 Illustrations on Policies In Force One Year or More—The illustration actuary  is required 
to annually certify that the disciplined current scale , for both new business and in force 
illustrations, complies with the Model  and this standard. The Model  requires that the 
illustrated scale  be no more favorable to the policyholder than the lesser of the currently 
payable scale  and the disciplined current scale . The disciplined current scale , for a 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
9 policy in force one year or more, con tinues to be in compliance with the Model  and this 
standard, if any of the following apply:  
 
a. the currently payable scale  has not been changed since the last certification and 
the illustration actuary  determines that experience si nce the last certification does 
not warrant changes in the disciplined current scale  that would make it sig-
nificantly less favorable to  the policyholder; or 
 
b. the currently payable scale  has been changed since the development of the 
disciplined current scale  most recently certified only to the extent that changes 
are reasonably consistent with changes in experience assumptions underlying the 
disciplined current scale ; or 
 
c. the currently payable scale  has been made less favor able to the policyholder 
since the last certification and the change is more than the change in the current experience would dictate. 
 
If none of the conditions in (a), (b), or (c) abov e is met, the illustration actuary  should 
(1) review the experience factors  underlying the disciplined current scale  and revise as 
necessary, and (2) develop a new disciplined current scale  for this policy form.  
 
In the context of in-force illustrations for policies receiving distributions of accumulated surplus or prior gains (including those resulting from the formation of a closed block), the actuary should consider including these distributions both in the disciplined current scale  
and in the illustrated scale , only to the extent that (1) su ch distributions are currently 
being paid to the policyholders by the insurer,  and (2) the insurer has indicated its intent 
and ability to continue to do so for the fore seeable future. Such accumulated surplus or 
prior gains may be used in conducting the tests for self-support and lapse-support.  
 3.8 Changes in Practice—An insurer may introduc e certain changes in the way it conducts its 
business, which may have significant positive or  negative effects on future experience. If 
the action has already occurre d, but not enough time has elapsed for it to be reflected in 
the insurer’s actual experience , it may nevertheless be re flected in the assumptions 
underlying the disciplined current scale . The actuary should consider recognizing any 
changes, such as the following, to the extent known to the actuary: 
 
a. a change in underwriting standards, such  as introducing preferred risk, guaranteed 
issue, or simplified underwriting;  
 b. a change in commission levels; 
 
c. a reduction in staff; 
 
d. a change in investment policies, such as  changes in hedging activities and changes 
in asset class allocations; and  
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
10 e. new or revised reinsurance agreements. 
 
In order to be reflected in the disciplined current scale , such changes should have already 
been made and not simply be planned for in the future.  
 3.9 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others—When relying on data or 
other information supplied by others, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 23, Data 
Quality , for guidance. 
 3.10 Documentation—The documentation that suppo rts the actuarial certif ication described in 
section 4.1 with respect to the construction of the disciplined current scale , maintained in 
conformance with ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications , should include the 
following: 
 
a. description of, and rationale for, the investment income, mortality, persistency, 
expense, tax, and other assumptions; 
 
b. description of, and rationa le for, any other calculat ion methods and assumptions 
used to carry out the tests and de monstrations described herein; and 
 
c. demonstration that the self-support a nd lapse-support tests have been met. 
  
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 
 4.1  Certification—The Model
1 requires the illustration actuary  to certify annually that the 
illustrated scale  and the disciplined current scale  are in compliance both with the 
requirements as set forth in the Model  and with the requirements set forth in this ASOP. 
Certifications should also be made for newly introduced forms before a new policy form is 
illustrated.2  
 
The certification should di sclose the following: 
 a. for business issued in the last five years and within the scope of the certification, 
whether or not the currently payable scale  has been reduced since the last 
certification for reasons unrel ated to experience changes;
3  
 
b. the choice of expense assumptions as discussed in section 3.4.1(e);4  
  
c. any inconsistencies between the illustrated nonguaranteed elements  for new 
policies and similar in-force policies;5 and 
                                                           
1 As stated in  Model sections 11.B, C(5)-(6), and D(1)(a). 
2 As stated in  Model  section 11.D(1)(b). 
3 As stated in Model section 11.C(5). 
4 As stated in Model  section 11.C(6). 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
11  
d. any inconsistencies between the illustrated nonguaranteed elements  for new and 
in-force policies and the nonguaranteed element  amounts actually paid, credited, 
or charged to the same or similar forms.6 
 
As required by the Model ,7 if an illustration actuary  is unable to certify the illustrated 
scale  for any policy form the insurer intends to use, the actuary should notify the board of 
directors of the insurer and the commissioner pr omptly of his or her inability to certify.  
 4.2 Notice of Error in Certif ication—As required by the Model,
8 if an error in a previous 
certification is discovered, the illustration actuary  (or successor illustration actuary ) 
shall promptly notify the board of director s of the insurer and the commissioner.  
 
The certification should be consid ered in error if the certif ication would not have been 
issued or would have been materially altered had the error not been made. The 
certification should not be considered to be in  error solely because of data that become 
available, or information concerning events th at occurred, subsequent  to the certification 
date.  
 
4.3  Disclosures—The actuary should include the fo llowing, as applicable, in  the certification: 
 
a. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.2, if any material assumption or method 
was prescribed by applicable law (statute s, regulations, and other legally binding 
authority); 
 b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsib ility for any materi al assumption or 
method selected by a party other than the actuary; and 
 c. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, secti on 4.4, if, in the act uary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has otherwise deviated  materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
5 As stated in Model section 11.C(5). 
6 See note 5 above. 
7 As stated in Model section 11.E. 
8 As stated in Model section 11.D(2). 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
12 Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 
Note : This appendix is provided for informational pur poses but is not part of the standard of 
practice.   
Background 
 Sales illustrations have been of concern to regulators for over a century, going back at least to the 
Armstrong Commission (1905-1906). Developments  prior to 1995 involving insurance products, 
illustration technology, and the volatility of financial markets led to heightened concern and to the 
adoption of the NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation  (Model ).  
 Actuaries have been involved in the process of establishing scales of dividends and other 
nonguaranteed elements to be illustrated by in surance companies for decades. Until the 1980s, 
nonguaranteed elements were essentially synonym ous with participati ng dividends, and the 
sources of scales of illustrated dividends we re tables prepared by the respective insurance 
companies. Since that time, there has been a pr oliferation of policies with nonguaranteed elements 
other than dividends. Improving technology has also  made possible the development of software 
that enables insurance agents to produce sales illustrations based on a variety of assumptions, 
potentially with little or no direct involvement on the part of the insurer. The Model  assigns major 
responsibilities regard ing compliance to an actuary w ho is appointed by the insurer. 
 
Illustrations generally have three primary uses: 
 
1. to show the buyer the mechanics of the policy, i.e., how a particular financial 
design or concept works, and how policy va lues or premium payments may change 
over time; 
 
2. to compare the cost or performa nce of different policies; and 
 3. to show how the policy fits into the policyholder’s financial plan.  
 A sales illustration simply shows the performa nce of one particular scale of nonguaranteed 
elements into the future. Actual nonguaranteed el ements will almost certainly vary from those 
illustrated. Different policies will experience different variances from illustrated values. 
 
 
Current Practices 
 Since the promulgation of the original standard in 1995, produc t innovation has continued as 
pricing structures have been re fined, secondary guarantees have  been developed, an increasing 
variety of equity-indexed and other indexed life insurance products have been developed, and 
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
13 additional new underwriting classes have been a dded. Until the release of Actuarial Guideline 49 
(AG 49), it had been common practice to illust rate these new products pursuant to the Model  and 
this standard as it existed. With the introduc tion of AG 49, illustrations of contracts providing 
interest credits linked to an ex ternal index or indices will be  subject to AG 49 and this updated 
standard.  Varying degrees of flexibility are provided by in surers to their agents in customizing sales 
illustrations, depending somewhat on whether th e producers are brokers or career agents. 
Generally, the tools that insurers provide allow fl exibility with respect to column selection and 
formats, variations on nonguaranteed elements, a nd different premium patterns. Along with this 
flexibility may be the requirement that the buyer also be given a ledger illustration in an insurer-
approved format.
  
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
14 Appendix 2 
 
Comments on Exposure Draft and Responses 
 
The exposure draft of this revised ASOP, Compliance with the NAIC L ife Insurance Illustrations 
Model Regulation , was issued in June 2016 with a comm ent deadline of September 30, 2016. Five 
comment letters were received, some of which were submitted on behalf of multiple 
commentators, such as by firms or committ ees. For purposes of this appendix, the term 
“commentator” may refer to more than one person associated with a particular comment letter. The Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 24 carefully considered all comments received, reviewed the 
exposure draft, and proposed changes. The Li fe Committee and the ASB reviewed the proposed 
changes and made modificat ions where appropriate. 
 Summarized below are the signifi cant issues and questions contai ned in the comment letters and 
responses.  The term “reviewers” in appendix 2 includes the Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 24, the Life 
Committee, and the ASB. Also, unless otherwise not ed, the section numbers and titles used in 
appendix 2 refer to those in the exposure draft. 
 
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Section  3.4.1(c), Assumptions Underlying  the Disciplined Current Scale 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator said that the Life Insuranc e Marketing and Research Association is now 
LIMRA. 
 
The reviewers agree and made this change. 
Section 3.4.2, Relationship  of Actual Experience to Disciplined Current Scale 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator inquired if the removal of the word “promptly” reflected a change in 
guidance relative to how quickly changes in experience should be reflected when determined 
to be significant and ongoing.  
The reviewers believe that the guidance is substantially unchanged, and therefore made no 
change. 
Section 3.5, Requirements for Self-Support
Comment  
 
  
 
Response One commentator noted that if more than one Benchmark Index Account is used for an 
illustrated policy, under the latest adopted ve rsion of AG 49 each set of index accounts 
corresponding to each Benchmar k Index Account must independ ently pass the self-support 
and lapse-support tests, whereas the exposure dr aft indicates that testing in the aggregate 
would be permissible.  
 
The reviewers agree and modified th is section to reflect the comment. 
  
ASOP No. 24—Doc. No. 184  
15 Section 3.6, Requirements to Preven t Lapse-Supported Illustrations 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator recommended including a drafting note with respect to the wording change to ensure 
that practitioners understand that the change was made to clarify rather than to reflect a change in guidance. 
 
The reviewers believe that the wording changes clarify the guidance with respect to the lapse-support test and therefore made no change in response to this comment. 
Comment 
 
  
 
Response One commentator posed specific questions related to  the application of the lapse-support test, one 
involving the use of experience beyond the fifth policy year when testing previously issued policy forms, 
and a second involving the impact of reinsurance on the lapse-support and self-support tests.  
The reviewers believe that the current language covers these issues at the appropriate level of detail and 
therefore made no change in response to this comment . This comment has been referred to the Academy’s 
Life Illustration Work Group for possible inclusion in a practice note. 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested clarifying the application of  the lapse-support test to flexible premium policy 
forms that are not funded to keep the policy in force for its full term.  
The reviewers believe that the current language covers these issues at the appropriate level of detail and 
therefore made no change in response to this comment . This comment has been referred to the Academy’s 
Life Illustration Work Group for possible inclusion in a practice note. 
Section 3.8, Changes in Practice  
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested changing section 3.8 to cl arify how the last sentence is associated with the 
rest of that section. 
 The reviewers agree and revised this section. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 2 
 
 
Revised Edition 
 
 
Nonguaranteed Elements  
for Life Insurance and Annuity Products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developed by the 
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 2 of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
September 2021 
 
Doc. No. 204

ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 iiT AB L E  O F  C ONT E N T S 
 
Transmittal Memorandum iv 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1  
1.1 Purpose 1  
1.2 Scope 1  
1.3 Cross References 2  
1.4 Effective Date 2  
 
Section 2.  Definitions 2  
2.1 Anticipated Experience Factor 2  
2.2 Determination Policy 2  
2.3 Guaranteed Element 2  
2.4 Nonguaranteed Element (NGE) 3  
2.5 NGE Framework 3  
2.6  NGE Scale 3  
2.7 Policy 3  
2.8 Policy Class 3  
2.9 Profitability Metric 3  
 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3  
3.1 NGE Framework 3  
3.2 Providing Advice on the Actuarial Aspects of the Determination Policy 4  
3.2.1 Providing Advice on Developing or Modifying the Determination Policy 4  
3.2.2 Providing Advice on Applying the Determination Policy 5  
3.3 Establishment of or Changes to Policy Classes 6  
3.3.1 For Future Sales of a New or Existing Product 6  
3.3.2 For In-Force Policies 7  
3.4 Determination Process for NGE Scales 7  
3.4.1 Determination Process for Future Sales of a New or Existing Product 8  
3.4.2 Determination Process for In-Force Policies 8  
3.4.2.1 Reviewing Prior Determinations 9  
3.4.2.2 Analyzing Experience 9  
3.4.2.3 Considering Whether to Recommend a Revision to NGE Scales 9  
3.4.2.4 Determining the Revised NGE Scales 10  
3.4.2.5 Additional Considerations 11  
3.5 NGEs Used in Illustrations Not Subject to ASOP No. 24 11  
3.6 Providing Opinions and Disclosures to Meet Regulatory Requirements 12  
3.7 Reliance on Others for Data, Projections, and Supporting Analysis 12  
3.8 Reliance on Assumptions or Methods Selected by Another Party 12  
3.9 Reliance on Another Actuary 12  
3.10 Documentation 13  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 iii Section 4.  Communications and Disclosures 13  
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 13  
4.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 15  
 
APPENDIXES 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 16  
Background 16  
Current Practices 17  
Appendix 2 Comments on the Second Exposure Draft and Responses 18  
  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 iv  
September 2021 
 
TO: Members of Actuarial Organizations Governed by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons Interested in Nonguaranteed 
Elements for Life Insurance and Annuity Products 
 
FROM: Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ: Revision of Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 2 
 
This document contains the revision of ASOP No. 2, now titled Nonguaranteed Elements for Life 
Insurance and Annuity Products .  
 
History of the Standard 
 
In 1986, the Interim Actuarial Standards Board adopted the original version of ASOP No. 2, 
which was titled The Redetermination (or Initial Determination) of Non-Guaranteed Charges 
and/or Benefits for Life Insurance and Annuity Contracts . In 1990, the ASB adopted a 
reformatted version of ASOP No. 2. (Prior to 2013, ASOP No. 2 was numbered ASOP No. 1.) 
 
In 1995, the ASB adopted ASOP No. 24, Compliance with the NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations 
Model Regulation , which was created in conjunction with the National Association of Insurance 
Commissioners’ (NAIC) Life Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation (the Model). Not all 
illustrated life insurance and annuity policies are subject to the Model. The 2004 revision of 
ASOP No. 2 imposed new obligations on the actuary for policy illustrations not subject to the 
Model.  
 
Since ASOP No. 2 was last updated in 2004, there has been increased attention to the practices 
insurers use to determine and manage NGEs within individual life insurance and annuity 
products. The ASOP is being updated to reflect current practices and provide additional guidance 
on the determination of NGEs. In developing this revision, the task force reviewed and 
incorporated concepts from documents that supported the development of the original version of 
this ASOP in 1986.  
 
First Exposure Draft 
 
The first exposure draft was issued in March 2019 with a comment deadline of July 15, 2019. 
Sixteen comment letters were received and considered in making changes that were reflected in 
the second exposure draft.  
 
Second Exposure Draft 
 
The second exposure draft was issued in July 2020 with a comment deadline of November 13, 
2020. Seven comment letters were received and considered in making changes that are reflected 
in the final standard.   
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 v 
For a summary of issues contained in these comment letters, please see appendix 2 . 
 
Notable Changes from the Second Exposure Draft  
 
Notable changes made to the second exposure draft are summarized below. Additional changes 
were made to improve readability, clarity, or consistency.  
 
1. Section 1.2 was clarified to specify that actuarial services with respect to in-force policies 
performed after the effective date of this standard are in scope.  
 
2. In section 2.5, the definition of NGE framework was clarified. 
 
3. In section 2.6, the definition of NGE scales was clarified to include NGE scales that may 
vary by one or more parameters or may not vary by any parameter, and additional 
examples were provided.  
 
4. Section 3.1 was updated to eliminate duplication with the definition of NGE framework 
in section 2.5.  
 
5. In section 3.3.1, language was clarified to recognize that policy classes could be defined 
at various levels and to include methodology reflecting policy duration, and an example 
was added. 
 
6. In section 3.4, changes were made to clarify the guidance in instances when following the 
determination policy would be inconsistent with section 3.2 and to clarify the language to 
improve alignment with section 3.2.  
 
7. The language in section 3.4.1(g) was clarified to reference the determination policy rather 
than section 3.4.2.4. 
 
8. In section 3.4.2.4, changes were made to improve consistency with section 3.4.2.3 and to 
clarify reliance on prior analysis. 
 
9. In section 3.4.2.5, language was added to address circumstances where the insurer 
allocates past losses or gains.  
 
10. In section 3.5, the language was changed to be consistent with the language in the 
existing ASOP. 
 
11. In section 4.1, disclosure 4.1(q) was added to reflect changes in section 3.4.2.5. 
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 viNotable Changes to the Existing ASOP  
 
A cumulative summary of the notable changes from the existing ASOP are summarized below. 
Notable changes do not include additional changes made to improve readability, clarity, or 
consistency. 
 
1. In section 1.2, the scope was clarified to exclude actuarial services with respect to the 
determination of any reinsurance contract elements the are not guaranteed. 
 
2. In section 2, the definitions were expanded and clarified. 
 
3. In sections 2.5 and 3.1, the concept of an insurer’s NGE framework was defined and 
introduced.  
 
4. In section 3.2, guidance was expanded for advising on the actuarial aspects of the 
determination policy, including advice that is consistent with the following: 
 
a. NGE scales are determined with the expectation that they will be revised only if 
anticipated experience factors  have changed since issue or, alternatively, since the 
previous revision; and 
 
b. NGE scales are determined based on reasonable expectations of future experience 
and are not determined with the objective of recouping past losses or distributing 
past gains. 
 
5. In section 3.3, guidance for establishing or making changes to policy classes was 
expanded. 
 
6. In section 3.4, guidance for determining NGE scales was expanded to align with sections 
3.2 and 3.3 and to include guidance on additional considerations that were not part of the 
previous determination of NGE scales. 
 
7. In section 3.5, guidance for recommending NGE scales used in illustrations not subject to 
ASOP No. 24 was updated. 
 
8. In section 3.6, guidance for providing opinions and disclosures to meet regulatory 
requirements was added. 
 
9. In sections 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9, guidance for relying on data, projections, and supporting 
analysis supplied by others, relying on assumptions or methods selected by another party, 
and reliance on another actuary was added. 
 
10. In section 3.10, documentation requirements were added. 
 
11. In section 4, disclosure requirements were added, mostly to address expanded guidance 
throughout section 3. 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 vii 
The ASB thanks everyone who took the time to contribute comments and suggestions on the 
exposure drafts. 
The ASB voted in September 2021 to adopt this standard.   
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 viii  
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 2 
 
Gabriel R. Schiminovich, Chairperson 
David J. Hippen Linda D. Rodway 
Brian R. Lessing Lance E. Schulz  
Donna C. Megregian  
 
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Linda M. Lankowski, Chairperson 
Janice A. Duff  Gabriel R. Schiminovich 
Lisa S. Kuklinski Jeremy Starr  
Donna C. Megregian   
   
 
 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Darrell D. Knapp, Chairperson 
Elizabeth K. Brill Cande J. Olsen 
Robert M. Damler Kathleen A. Riley 
Kevin M. Dyke Judy K. Stromback 
David E. Neve  Patrick B. Woods 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets standards for appropriate actuarial practice  
in the United States through the development and promulgation of Actuarial Standards of 
Practice (ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the procedures an actuary should follow when 
performing actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose when 
communicating the results of those services. 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 1 ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE NO. 2 
 
 
NONGUARANTEED ELEMENTS 
FOR LIFE INSURANCE AND ANNUITY PRODUCTS 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 
1.1 Purpose—This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP or standard) provides guidance to 
actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect to the determination of 
nonguaranteed elements  (NGEs) for life insurance and annuity products, including riders 
attached to such products.  
 
1.2 Scope—This standard applies to actuaries when performing actuarial services with 
respect to the determination and, if applicable, illustration of NGEs for life insurance and 
annuity policies written on individual policy forms where NGEs may vary at the 
discretion of the insurer, except as provided below. Actuarial services performed on or 
after the effective date of this standard also include determinations and illustrations for 
policies in force on the effective date of this standard.  
 
Throughout this standard, the term “determination” includes both the initial 
determination at policy issue and subsequent determinations for in-force policies. 
 
The standard also applies to actuaries when performing similar actuarial services for group 
master contracts with individual certificates where NGEs are determined in a similar 
manner to products written on individual life and annuity policy forms. Examples of 
products within the scope of this standard include universal life, indeterminate premium 
life, and deferred annuity products. Such products may be fixed, variable, or indexed. 
 
Actuarial services for group products with NGEs that are not determined in a similar 
manner to those written on individual life and annuity policy forms are not in scope. Two 
examples are traditional group term life insurance and certain retirement funding products 
(for example, synthetic guaranteed interest contracts). To the extent that actuarial services 
for a product do not clearly fall into the scope, the actuary should use professional judgment 
to determine whether the services are in scope. 
 
This standard does not apply to actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect 
to policyholder dividends, which are covered by ASOP No. 15, Dividends for Individual 
Participating Life Insurance, Annuities, and Disability Insurance . To the extent that a 
product involves both NGEs and policyholder dividends, this standard applies to actuaries 
when performing actuarial services with respect to NGEs, and ASOP No. 15 applies to 
actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect to policyholder dividends.  
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 2This standard does not apply to actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect 
to the determination of any reinsurance contract elements that are not guaranteed in a 
reinsurance contract. 
 
This standard does not apply to actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect 
to illustrations of NGEs subject to ASOP No. 24, Compliance with the NAIC Life 
Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation .  
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with 
law (statutes, regulations, and other legally binding authority), or for any other reason the 
actuary deems appropriate, the actuary should refer to section 4. If a conflict exists between 
this standard and applicable law, the actuary should comply with applicable law. 
 
1.3 Cross References When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the originally referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 
1.4  Effective Date—This standard is effective for actuarial services performed on or after 
June 1, 2022.  
 
 
Section 2. Definitions 
 
The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice and appear in bold 
throughout the ASOP. 
 
2.1 Anticipated Experience Factor—An assumption of future experience used in the 
determination of NGEs. Examples of anticipated  experience factors  include rates of 
investment income, mortality, morbidity, policy persistency, and expense. 
 
2.2 Determination Policy The insurer’s principles or objectives for determining NGEs. For 
example, the determination policy  could include the insurer’s governing principles and 
requirements, profitability objectives, capital objectives, guidelines for drafting policy 
provisions related to NGEs, principles for addressing illustration requirements, and 
requirements for and frequency of reviews of NGEs on in-force products.  
  
2.3 Guaranteed Element—A premium, value, charge, or benefit that limits an NGE. 
Guaranteed elements are specified in the policy. Examples of guaranteed elements  
include maximum premium charges, maximum expense charges, minimum credited 
interest rates, maximum cost of insurance charges, maximum gross premiums, minimum 
index parameters, maximum mortality and expense (M&E) risk charges, and maximum 
policy loan interest rates. 
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 32.4  Nonguaranteed Element (NGE)—Any premium, charge, or benefit within an insurance 
policy that 1) affects policy costs or values, 2) is not guaranteed in the policy, and 3) can 
be changed at the discretion of the insurer. An NGE may provide a more favorable value 
to the policyholder than a guaranteed element . For the purpose of this ASOP, an NGE 
reflects expectations of future experience as opposed to, for example, a dividend, which 
reflects participation in past experience. Examples of premiums, charges, or benefits that 
can be changed at the discretion of the insurer may include credited interest, cost of 
insurance (COI) charges, bonuses, indeterminate premiums, index parameters used to 
determine credited interest, and expense charges.  
 
2.5 NGE Framework—The determination policy , methodology for establishing policy 
classes, and any additional practices, methods, and criteria used by the insurer to determine 
NGE scales that might not be part of the determination policy  or methodology for 
establishing policy classes .  
 
2.6 NGE Scale—For each NGE, a series of one or more rates or values as determined by the 
insurer at a point in time. The elements of an NGE scale  may vary by one or more 
parameters or may not vary by any parameter. Examples include the following:  
 
a.  COI rates that could vary based on issue age, underwriting class, and duration;  
 
b. an expense load that could vary by duration and be applicable over a limited number 
of policy years; and 
 
c.  an interest rate that does not vary by any parameter.  
 
2.7 Policy An individual life insurance policy, an individual annuity contract, or a group 
certificate that has NGEs that operate in substantially the same manner as NGEs in an 
individual life insurance policy or an individual annuity contract. A policy includes any 
attached rider or endorsement.  
 
2.8 Policy Class— Policies that are grouped together for the purposes of determining an NGE.  
 
2.9 Profitability Metric—A measurement used to assess a product’s projected level of 
financial results. 
 
 
 
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 
3.1  NGE Framework—The actuary should understand the insurer’s NGE framework  in 
relation to the actuarial services requested. The actuary should understand how the NGE 
framework  has been applied in the past in relation to the actuarial services requested, if 
available. The actuary should take into account the elements of the NGE framework  that 
are relevant to the actuarial services requested. Examples of elements of the NGE 
framework  include the following:  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 4 
a. the methodology for evaluating experience and developing anticipated  experience 
factors; 
 
b. the source or sources of data used in developing anticipated experience factors ; 
 
c. the frequency of review of anticipated  experience factors  and policy classes ; 
 
d. the methodologies for allocating expenses and investment income; 
 
e. the models or methods used; 
 
f. the marketing objectives, such as distribution channels, target markets, and 
competitive objectives; 
 
g. the objectives used in setting profitability metrics ; 
 
h. the methodology for determining reserves and capital objectives; and 
 
i. the insurer’s governance process, including the decision and approval process.  
 
If the NGE framework  is absent, or in the actuary’s professional judgment, is incomplete 
or needs to be updated to reflect the current environment, the actuary should recommend 
that the NGE framework  be created, completed, or updated.  
 
3.2 Providing Advice on the Actuarial Aspects of the Determination Policy—The actuary may 
provide advice on 1) developing or modifying the determination policy , or 2) applying 
the determination  policy.  
 
When providing advice on the actuarial aspects of the determination policy , the actuary 
should provide advice consistent with the following:  
 
a. NGE scales  are determined with the expectation that they will be revised only if 
anticipated experience factors have changed since issue, or alternatively, since 
the previous revision.   
 
b. NGE scales  are determined based on reasonable expectations of future experience 
and are not determined with the objective of recouping past losses or distributing 
past gains.  
 
3.2.1  Providing Advice on Developing or Modifying the Determination Policy—When 
advising an insurer on developing or modifying its determination policy , the 
actuary should take into account the following, if applicable: 
 
a. the policy provisions and applicable law; 
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 5b. how anticipated experience factors  reflect expectations of future 
experience; 
 
c. how the variability and credibility of each anticipated experience factor 
may impact  the determination of the  NGE scales ;  
 
d. the insurer’s reserve, profitability, capital, surplus, and marketing 
objectives;  
 
e.  reinsurance and taxes; and 
  
f. periodic review of NGEs in in-force policies, such as the maximum time 
period between successive insurer reviews of NGEs. 
 
The actuary may take into account other items relevant to the determination 
policy.  
 
The actuary should document the sources of the determination policy used in 
developing the advice and how (a)–(f) above and any additional relevant items were 
taken into account. For example, portions of the determination policy  may be 
found in the insurer’s governance processes, corporate policies, or operating 
practices.  
 
3.2.2 Providing Advice on Applying the Determination Policy—When advising on 
applying the determination policy  for determining initial NGE scales , evaluating 
whether to revise existing NGE scales , or revising existing NGE scales , the actuary 
should take into account the following, if applicable: 
 
a. the need to make additional assumptions about how the determination 
policy applies to the assignment; 
 
b. guaranteed elements , policyholder options including the likelihood of 
antiselection, and other relevant provisions of the policy; 
 
c. impacts on or from reserve, profitability, capital, surplus, and  marketing 
objectives, or changes in such objectives; 
 
d. impact on or from reinsurance and taxation; 
 
e. applicable law (including, for example, for variable products, any 
constraints or other requirements imposed by applicable securities law); and 
 
f. resources available. 
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 6If, in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary believes that the 
determination policy  may be inconsistent with the guidance in sections 3.2 and 
3.2.1, the actuary should recommend that the determination policy  be revised.  
 
3.3 Establishment of or Changes to Policy Classes—When preparing for an assignment, the 
actuary should review the existing policy classes  for the product or similar products within 
the insurer’s NGE framework . 
 
3.3.1 For Future Sales of a New or Existing Product—If the policy classes  for future 
sales have not been defined in the NGE framework , or if they have been defined, 
but in the actuary’s professional judgment are incomplete, do not reflect changing 
circumstances (for example, new underwriting practices, or new profit or marketing 
objectives), or are inconsistent with the items below, the actuary should recommend 
the establishment of or changes to the policy classes  that are  
 
a. consistent with the guidance in ASOP No. 12, Risk Classification ; 
 
b. appropriate for each NGE (a particular policy may be assigned to one or 
more policy classes  at issue based on anticipated experience factors  and 
NGEs, for example, one policy class  for credited interest and a different 
policy class  for COI charges);  
 
c. appropriately reflective of differences within anticipated  experience 
factors (for example, smoker versus nonsmoker mortality); 
 
d. refined appropriately to mitigate antiselection; and  
 
e. not expected to be redefined after issue.  
 
Policy classes  may be defined by grouping policies at various levels, for example, 
at a product level, across multiple products, or within a product or products.  
 
The actuary may recommend policy clas ses that use different grouping 
methodologies based on policy duration. For example, a policy class  may be 
defined in terms of a select and ultimate mortality method, or a policy class  may 
be defined in terms of an investment year interest crediting method that uses a new 
money method in the early durations and a portfolio method in the later durations.  
 
When recommending policy classes for future sales, the actuary should take into 
account the policy provisions, the structure of guaranteed elements  and NGEs, 
the date on which the recommended policy classes  would take effect (for example, 
policies issued before or after a particular date could be in different policy classes ), 
and the underwriting characteristics and marketing objectives for the product. The 
actuary may also take into account any additional relevant factors.  
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 73.3.2  For In-Force Policies—The actuary should recommend that in-force policies 
remain assigned to their policy classes , unless there is new information that is 
material to the anticipated experience factors  and supports reassigning the 
policies to different policy classes . For example, a change in one state’s premium 
tax that affects some policies within a policy class  differently than it affects others 
could justify reassigning such policies to a different policy class . 
 
In addition, the actuary may recommend combining or redefining policy classes if, 
in the actuary’s professional judgment, such combinations or redefinitions would 
be appropriate. For example, if the experience for a policy class  is not credible, the 
policy class  could be combined with other policy classes  for the purposes of 
determining anticipated experience factors .  
 
When recommending a change in the assignment of policies to policy classes , or 
combining or redefining policy classes , the actuary should follow the guidance in 
section 3.3.1. 
 
3.4 Determination Process for NGE Scales—When determining NGE scales for future sales 
of a new or existing product and for in-force policies in accordance with the NGE 
framework , the actuary should take into account the determination policy  and the 
following:   
  
a. the appropriateness of the models, methods, and profitability metrics ; 
 
b. how  the anticipated experience factors relate to NGE scales ; 
 
c. the consistency of NGE scales  with policy provisions; 
 
d. any limits on NGE scales  due to regulatory constraints; 
 
e. any limits on NGE scales  due to guaranteed elements ; and 
 
f. the impact on or from reserve, profitability, capital, surplus, and marketing 
objectives. 
 
The actuary may take into account practical constraints and any other relevant 
circumstances.  
 
The actuary may use approximation methods, such as smoothing and interpolation, when 
determining NGE scales .  
 
If, in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary believes that following the 
determination policy when determining  NGE scales would be inconsistent with the 
guidance in section 3.2, the actuary should consider discussing these inconsistencies with 
the insurer. The actuary should document any unresolved inconsistencies and should 
consider providing advice consistent with section 3.2.2.  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 8 
3.4.1  Determination Process for Future Sales of a New or Existing Product—When 
determining NGE scales for future sales of a new or existing product, the actuary 
should take into account the following:  
 
a. how anticipated experience factors  were developed and whether they 
reflect the product’s features, intended markets, distribution methods, 
underwriting procedures, and  policy classes  (see section 3.3.1);  
 
b. how NGE scales are structured to cover costs under the product design, as 
well as the potential impact on profitability if policyholder behavior varies 
from expectations; 
 
c. that NGE scales are determined with the expectation that they will not be 
revised unless the anticipated experience factors change;  
 
d. whether the NGE scales  are consistent with the language of the policy;  
 
e.  projected profitability; 
 
f. constraints on the ability to revise NGE scales to reflect future changes in 
anticipated experience factors (for example,  guaranteed  elements, 
contractual limitations, development and implementation cost, systems 
constraints); and 
 
g. how elements of the determination policy  affect  the ability to revise NGE 
scales after issue. 
 
The actuary may use prior analysis in the determination of the NGE scales , if 
appropriate. For example, changes in credited interest may be based on a previously 
established interest rate spread.   
 
The actuary should document the NGE determination process and results, 
including how items (a)–(g) and any prior analysis were taken into account.  
 
The actuary should consider conducting sensitivity analyses to evaluate the impact 
of future deviations from the anticipated experience. The actuary should consider 
recommending how often such anticipated experience factors  be reviewed. 
 
3.4.2 Determination Process for In-Force Policies—The determination process for in-
force policies consists of reviewing prior determinations, analyzing emerging 
experience relative to anticipated experience factors , considering whether to 
recommend a revision in the NGE scales , and, if a revision is to be made, 
determining the revised NGE scales . 
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 93.4.2.1 Reviewing Prior Determinations—The actuary should review prior 
determinations, including the original determination in effect at the time 
of policy issue. This may include information such as previous 
anticipated experience factors , profitability metrics , pattern of profits, 
NGE scales , and other assumptions.   
 
If the information related to prior determinations is not available or 
incomplete, the actuary should reconstruct prior determinations to the 
extent practicable and necessary for the determination process, and 
document the methods and assumptions used. If reconstructing the prior 
determinations is not practicable due to incomplete information or other 
limitations, the actuary should select and document a reasonable approach 
to gain an understanding of the prior determination. 
 
3.4.2.2 Analyzing Experience—When analyzing how experience is emerging 
relative to anticipated experience factors , the actuary should take into 
account the following, if applicable:  
 
a. the time elapsed since the last analysis of experience;  
 
b. the credibility of experience; 
 
c. the size of the relevant group of policies or policy classes , such as 
number of policies, premium volume, insurance amount, or 
account value; 
 
d. the materiality of any change in the experience relative to the 
existing anticipated experience factors ;  
 
e. whether existing anticipated experience factors , including any 
projected trends,  are supported by actual experience; and 
 
f. whether profitability was particularly sensitive to changes in any  
anticipated experience factors , as disclosed in previous actuarial 
reports. 
 
The actuary should recommend that the anticipated experience factors 
be updated, if warranted by the results of the analysis.  
 
The actuary should document how (a)–(f) above and any additional 
relevant items were taken into account. 
 
3.4.2.3  Considering Whether to Recommend a Revision to NGE Scales—When 
considering whether to recommend a revision to NGE scales , the actuary 
should take into account the following, if applicable:  
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 10a. time elapsed since NGE scales  were last reviewed; 
 
b. the anticipated experience factors  that are used for revising 
NGE scales under the terms of the policy and applicable law;  
 
c. deviations in emerging experience from what was assumed in the 
prior determination of NGE scales ; 
 
d. how any recommended revision could affect reserves, capital, 
reinsurance, and taxation;  
 
e. the appropriateness of the profitability metrics and objectives. 
For example, an internal rate of return metric may have been used 
at policy issue, but a different metric may be appropriate when 
applied to in-force policies; 
 
f. the change in the prospective profitability due to the change in 
anticipated experience factors  and any additional factors for 
which a change may be reflected in the determination of NGEs 
under section 3.2(b), the terms of the policy, and applicable law;  
 
g. the complexity of the analysis needed. For example, when 
changing credited interest rates, the actuary may limit the analysis 
to changes in investment income, while other changes, such as 
COIs, may require more complex analysis and modeling, which 
could reflect multiple anticipated  experience factors  and require 
consideration of other NGEs;  
 
h. whether other analyses, such as sensitivity analysis, are needed; 
 
i. costs, practical implementation difficulties, and materiality of 
making revisions to the NGE scale ; and  
 
j. potential impacts on the policyholder (for example, policyholder 
behavior or policyholder equity) or the insurer of revising or not 
revising NGE scales  to reflect changes in anticipated experience 
factors. 
 
The actuary should document the results of the analysis, including how 
(a)-(j) above and any additional relevant items were taken into account, 
whether the actuary recommends a revision or not. 
 
3.4.2.4  Determining the Revised NGE Scales—When determining revised NGE 
scales, the actuary should take into account the provisions of section 
3.4.1(a)-(g) and should  
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 11a. identify the anticipated experience factors to be used when 
revising NGE scales , taking into account the terms of the policy 
and applicable law; 
 
b. base the revision of the NGE scales  on changes in the anticipated 
experience factors  identified in (a) above; and 
 
c. determine new NGE scales  using a method that is consistent with 
sections 3.2(a) and 3.2(b). For example, it might be appropriate to 
use a method to determine the revised NGE scales  such that the 
prospective profitability from the time of revision, taking into 
account the prospective pattern of profits by duration, is not 
materially greater than that using the original NGE scales  and 
original anticipated experience factors , holding all other 
assumptions constant between the projections. 
 
The actuary may use approximation and smoothing methods that are 
reasonable in relation to the costs and benefits provided. 
 
The actuary should perform an appropriate level of analysis based on the 
anticipated experience factors  and the type of revision being considered. 
The actuary may use relevant prior analysis in making the determination. 
For example, as discussed in section 3.4.2.3(g), changing COIs may 
require more complex analysis and modeling than routine changes in 
credited interest rates, which may rely on prior interest rate spread 
analysis. The actuary should ensure that the method and results of any 
analysis used to support the determination of the revised NGE scales , 
including how the provisions of section 3.4.1(a)-(g) and any additional 
relevant items as noted above were taken into account, are documented or 
addressed in prior documentation.  
 
3.4.2.5 Additional Considerations—When recommending or determining a 
revision to  NGE scales , the actuary may consider using additional 
anticipated experience factors  that were not part of the previous 
determination of NGE scales , such as a new tax-related expense. 
  
 If circumstances arise under which the insurer allocates past losses or 
gains by making adjustments to the NGE scales , for example, due to 
regulatory requirements, the actuary should document the circumstances 
and should consider recommending a methodology to separately account 
for such adjustments when considering future determinations of the NGE 
scales.  
 
3.5 NGEs Used in Illustrations Not Subject to ASOP No. 24 The actuary should 
recommend NGE scales  to be used in illustrations not subject to ASOP No. 24 that have 
been determined consistently with section 3.4. The actuary should also follow applicable 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 12regulations, guidelines, and standards for illustrations, such as those that are based upon 
the following:  
 
a. Annuity Disclosure Model Regulation  (Model 245); and  
 
b. Variable Life Insurance Model Regulation  (Model 270) and NAIC Actuarial 
Guideline 15.  
 
The actuary should consider conducting tests of illustrated NGE scales  to ascertain 
whether those illustrated NGE scales  could be supported by anticipated experience 
factors and other reasonable assumptions.  
 
3.6 Providing Opinions and Disclosures to Meet Regulatory Requirements—When providing 
opinions and disclosures to meet regulatory requirements relating to NGEs (for example, 
a response to an NAIC annual statement interrogatory) or actuarial services in support of 
such opinions and disclosures, the actuary should be knowledgeable about the requirements 
and information necessary to support the opinion or disclosure. Such information may 
include some or all of the following for the relevant products: 
 
a.  the insurer’s NGE framework ;  
 
b.  the requirements of applicable law; 
 
c.  the determination process, including how experience and financial results are 
emerging; and 
  
d.  previous regulatory filings.  
 
3.7  Reliance on Others for Data, Projections, and Supporting Analysis—The actuary may rely 
on data, projections, and supporting analysis supplied by others. When practicable, the 
actuary should review the data, projections, and supporting analysis for reasonableness and 
consistency.  For further guidance, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 23, ASOP No. 41, 
Actuarial Communications , and ASOP No. 56, Modeling . The actuary should disclose the 
extent of any such reliance.  
 
3.8  Reliance on Assumptions or Methods Selected by Another Party—When relying on 
assumptions or methods selected by another party, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 
41 for guidance. The actuary should disclose the extent of any such reliance.  
 
3.9 Reliance on Another Actuary—The actuary may rely on another actuary who has 
performed actuarial services related to the determination of NGEs. However, the relying 
actuary should be reasonably satisfied that the other actuary is qualified to perform the 
actuarial service, the actuarial service was performed in accordance with applicable 
ASOPs, and the actuarial service performed is appropriate for the objective of the 
assignment. The actuary should disclose the extent of any such reliance.  
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 133.10  Documentation—In addition to the documentation requirements throughout the rest of 
section 3, the actuary should consider preparing and retaining documentation to support 
compliance with the remaining requirements of section 3 and the disclosure requirements 
of section 4. When preparing documentation, the actuary should prepare it in a form such 
that another actuary qualified in the same practice area could assess the reasonableness of 
the actuary’s work. The degree of documentation should be based on the professional 
judgment of the actuary and may vary with the complexity and purpose of the actuarial 
services. In addition, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 41 for guidance related to the 
retention of file material other than that which is to be disclosed under section 4.  
 
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures  
 
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report— When issuing an actuarial report to which 
this standard applies, the actuary should refer to ASOP Nos. 12, 23, 41, and 56. In addition, 
the actuary should disclose the following (if applicable):  
  
a. any recommendations that were made with respect to developing, completing, or 
updating the NGE framework  (see section 3.1);  
 
b. advice the actuary provided on developing or modifying the determination policy 
(see sections 3.2 and 3.2.1); 
 
c. advice the actuary provided on how to apply the determination policy , including 
any advice that was inconsistent with the determination policy in order to follow 
the guidance in sections 3.2 or  that was inconsistent with the guidance in sections 
3.2 in order to comply with the determination policy , and the rationale for such 
inconsistencies (see section 3.2);  
 
d. recommendations made by the actuary to establish or change policy classes for 
future sales of a new or existing product (see sections 3.3.1 and 3.4.1[a]);  
 
e. recommendations made by the actuary for reassignment of in-force policies to 
different policy classes  (see section 3.3.2);  
 
f. any inconsistency with the determination policy  and the guidance in section 3.2 
when determining NGE scales  (see section 3.4); 
 
g. a description of the anticipated experience factors  used in the determination of 
NGEs and any changes to such factors since any prior determination (see sections 
3.4.1 and 3.4.2);   
 
h. a description of any material constraints on the ability to revise NGE scales  (see 
sections 3.4.1[f] and [g] and 3.4.2.4); 
 
i. results, observations, or recommendations from the determination process for NGE 
scales for future sales of a new or existing product, including results and 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 14observations from any profitability  analysis or sensitivity analysis (see section 
3.4.1); 
 
j. observations from the analysis that indicate that the profitability is particularly 
sensitive to changes in certain anticipated experience factors (see sections 3.4.1 
and 3.4.2.3[h]); 
 
k. any use of prior analysis (see section 3.4.1 and 3.4.2.4); 
 
l. any reconstructed prior determinations or reasonable approaches used when 
reconstructing the prior determinations was not possible (see section 3.4.2.1); 
 
m. any recommendation that anticipated experience factors  be updated and how 
these updated factors were taken into account when recommending changes to 
NGE scales  (see section 3.4.2.2); 
 
n. observations or recommendations to revise or not revise in-force NGE scales , 
including results from any profitability or sensitivity analysis (see section 3.4.2.3);  
 
o. results, observations, or recommendations from the determination process used to 
support any revisions to NGE scales  for in-force policies, including results and 
observations from any analysis (see section 3.4.2.4); 
 
p. the circumstances and rationale for using any additional anticipated experience 
factors that were not part of the previous determination of NGE scales (see section 
3.4.2.5); 
 
q.  the circumstances under which the insurer allocates past losses or gains by  making 
adjustments to the NGE scales  and any recommendations for a methodology to 
separately account for such adjustments when considering future determinations of 
the NGE scales  (see section 3.4.2.5); and  
 
r. results from any tests of illustrated NGE scales  not subject to ASOP No. 24 to 
ascertain whether those illustrated NGE scales  could be supported by anticipated 
experience factors and other reasonable assumptions (see section 3.5). 
 
s. extent of any reliance on the data, projections, and supporting analysis of others 
(see section 3.7); 
 
t. extent of any reliance on assumptions or methods selected by another party (see 
section 3.8); and 
 
u. extent of any reliance on another actuary (see section 3.9). 
 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 154.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report—The actuary also should include 
disclosures in accordance with ASOP No. 41 in an actuarial report for the following 
circumstances:  
 
a. if any material assumption or method was prescribed by applicable law; 
 
b. if the actuary states reliance on other sources and thereby disclaims responsibility 
for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; 
and 
 
c. if in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary has deviated materially from 
the guidance of this ASOP. 
 
  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 16Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
Note: This appendix is provided for informational purposes and is not part of the standard of 
practice. 
 
Background 
 
In the mid-1970s, activity increased with respect to individual life and annuity products with 
nonguaranteed elements (NGEs) as opposed to dividends under traditional participating policies.  
 
Because of the increased activity on these products, they came to represent significant market 
share and financial significance, and it was deemed necessary to develop an actuarial standard of 
practice in this area. Thus, the Interim Actuarial Standards Board adopted the original version of 
this ASOP as ASOP No. 1 in October 1986. (Prior to 2013, ASOP No. 2 was known as ASOP 
No. 1.) The Actuarial Standards Board adopted a reformatted version of ASOP No. 1 in 1990.  
 
In 1986, the policies in question were still evolving, and there was little standardization in areas 
such as benefit design, pricing structure, marketing practices, and investment philosophies. It was 
therefore impossible for the standard to offer guidance on these issues. Rather, the standard 
reflected that the actuary’s essential obligations were (1) to assure the completion of all activities 
required to advise the client professionally, and (2) to prepare an actuarial communication for the 
client presenting this advice. 
 
By the early 2000s, the volume of these products sold had continued to grow, and considerable 
product innovation had taken place. ASOP No. 1 was revised to reflect this new environment. It 
was also revised to be consistent, where appropriate, with ASOP No. 15, Dividend 
Determination for Participating Individual Life Insurance Policies and Annuity Contracts , and 
ASOP No. 24, Compliance with the NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation . The 
resulting revision of ASOP No. 1 was adopted in March 2004. 
 
In May 2011, ASOP No. 1 was updated for deviation language, and in March 2013, it was 
renumbered ASOP No. 2. 
 
In recent years, further developments affecting products with NGEs have taken place, such as the 
following: 
 
 continued increase in the sales of products with NGEs; 
 
 continued product evolution, including index features, persistency bonuses, living benefit 
riders, secondary guarantees, and new ancillary benefits;  
 
 advances in actuarial techniques for modeling, stochastic testing, and sensitivity analysis;  
 
 changes in life insurance company taxation, reserve valuation, and capital objectives;  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 17 
 enhancement of insurer governance procedures with respect to the determination of 
NGEs;  
 
 increased public awareness of changes to NGEs for in-force policies; and 
 
 increased regulation of NGEs, such as the promulgation of New York Regulation 210 in 
March 2018.  
 
In response to such developments, actuarial practices have evolved, and ASOP No. 2 has been 
updated to reflect these changes. 
 
Current Practices 
 
The actuary may provide professional services in three principal areas with respect to NGEs. The 
actuary is normally involved in the determination of NGE scales in accordance with insurer 
determination policy. The actuary may also be involved in advising the insurer on setting the 
determination policy or the establishment of or changes to policy classes. When determining 
NGEs, the actuary considers corporate governance practices, policy administration, regulation, 
marketing objectives, and consumer expectations, among other factors.  
 
The actuary may be called upon to determine NGE scales for future sales of a new or existing 
product and for in-force policies. Although the steps needed to complete these two broad 
categories of assignments have many common elements, there are significant differences with 
respect to the principles, methodologies, and criteria that are commonly followed.  
 
 
  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 18Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the Second Exposure Draft and Responses  
 
The second exposure draft of this ASOP, Nonguaranteed Elements for Life Insurance and 
Annuity Products,  was issued in July 2020 with a comment deadline of November 13, 2020. 
Seven comment letters were received, some of which were submitted on behalf of multiple 
commentators, such as by firms or committees. For purposes of this appendix, the term 
“commentator” may refer to more than one person associated with a particular comment letter. 
The ASOP No. 2 Task Force carefully considered all comments received, reviewed the exposure 
draft, and proposed changes. The ASB Life Committee and the ASB reviewed the proposed 
changes and made modifications where appropriate. 
 
Summarized below are the significant issues and questions contained in the comment letters and 
the responses. Minor wording or punctuation changes that were suggested but not significant are 
not reflected in this appendix, although they may have been adopted. 
 
The term “reviewers” in appendix 2 includes the ASOP No. 2 Task Force, the ASB Life 
Committee, and the ASB. Also, unless otherwise noted, the section numbers and titles used in 
appendix 2 refer to those in the second exposure draft. 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested defining “take into account” because it is unclear how it differs from 
“consider” or “reflect.” 
 
The reviewers do not believe “take into account” or “reflect” require definitions that differ from the 
ordinary English definitions. Note that the term “should consider” is discussed in ASOP No. 1, 
Introductory Standard of Practice . ASOP No. 1 states,  
 
The terms “must” and “should” are generally followed by a verb or phrase denoting 
action(s), such as “disclose,” “document,” “consider,” or “take into account.” For 
example, the phrase “should consider” is often used to suggest potential courses of 
action. If, after consideration, in the actuary’s professional judgment an action is not 
appropriate, the action is not required and failure to take this action is not a deviation 
from the guidance in the standard.  
 
Therefore , the reviewers made no change in response to this comment.  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator requested that the ASOP be reviewed for applicability to annuities. 
 
The reviewers note that section 1.2 describes which annuities are in scope and added examples 
applicable to both life and annuities throughout the ASOP.  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested differentiating between routine NGE changes and more complex NGE 
changes. 
 
The reviewers clarified the language in section 3.4 .2.4 in response to this comment.  
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator requested more guidance on the initial determination. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate  and made no change in response to this comment.    
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 19Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator said that it is unclear whether the actuary can improve an NGE or reverse an 
increase without the full analysis described in the ASOP. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate  and made no change in response to this comment.  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator was concerned that the ASOP poses limitations on alternative rate-setting 
processes, such as following an established plan (such as tracking an index or market rates).  
 
The reviewers  disagree and made no change in response to this comment.   
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator said that the ASOP was written for a consultant and not a company actuary. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and made no change in response to this commen t. 
SECTION 1. PURPOSE, SCOPE, CROSS REFERENCES, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
Section 1.2, Scope 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding language to clarify that the ASOP is not retroactively applicable 
to prior determinations before the effective date of the ASOP. 
 
The reviewers clarified the language.   
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested moving the sentence “Throughout this standard, the term determination 
includes both initial determination and subsequent redeterminations” to section 1.1. 
  
The reviewers disagree and made no change in response to this comment. 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding “to the extent possible” when referring to future determinations 
of in-force products after the effective date to provide sufficient flexibility. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate  and made no change in response to this comment.  
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator noted that ASOP No. 15, Dividends for Individual Participating Life Insurance, 
Annuities, and Disability Insurance , does not appear to define “dividend” and suggested adding a 
definition to ASOP No. 2. 
 
The reviewers disagree with the suggestion and made no change in response to this comment.  The 
reviewers note that section 2.4 states “For the purpose of this ASOP, an NGE reflects expectations of 
future experience as opposed to, for example, a dividend, which reflects participation in past 
experience.”   
Section 1.4, Effective Date 
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested an effective date six months after approval by the ASB. 
 
The reviewers note the effective date is June 1, 2022.  
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS 
Section 2.1, Anticipated Experience Factor 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding “may include but are not limited to” before the list of examples. 
 
The reviewers note that examples are illustrative, not exhaustive, and made no change. 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested clarifying whether “rates of” applies to investment income only or the 
entire list. 
 
The reviewers believe the language is appropriate and made no change.  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 20Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested modifying the example to reference policyholder elections. 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 2.3, Guaranteed Element 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “typically” before “specified in the policy” and in the example 
sentence. 
 
The reviewers believe the language is appropriate and made no change. 
Section 2.4, Nonguaranteed Element 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested rewording the second sentence for clarity. 
 
The reviewers agree and clarified the language accordingly. 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested changing “can be changed at the discretion of the insurer” to “may be 
changed…” 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 2.6, NGE Scale 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested either deleting NGE scale as a defined term or referencing anticipated 
experience factors in the definition. 
 
The reviewers disagree with the suggestion but clarified the language and added examples.  
Section 2.9, Profitability Metric  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested revising the language to replace “a product’s expected level of financial 
results” with “projected profitability.” 
 
The reviewers changed “expected” to “projected” based on this comment.  
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Section 3.1, NGE Framework 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response Two commentators suggested the difference between the determination policy and the NGE 
framework is unclear and suggested incorporating the concept of the NGE framework into the 
determination policy. 
 
The reviewers disagree with the suggestion to incorporate the concept of the NGE framework into 
the determination policy  but clarified the language in sections 2.5 and  3.1. 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting the examples and moving them to the definition of NGE 
framework, because it is unclear whether the list is intended to be a documentation requirement. 
 
The reviewers disagree with moving the examples and refer the commentator to sections 3.10 and 
4.1(a) with respect to documentation and disclosure .  
Section 3.1(e) (now section 3.1[d])  
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting 3.1(e), methodology for allocating income and costs. 
 
The reviewers clarified the language.  
Section 3.1(g) (now section 3.1[f])  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested deleting “distribution strategy” from section 3.1(g). 
 
The reviewers changed “distribution strategy” to “distribution channels” (now 3.1[f]). 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 21Section 3.2, Providing Advice on the Actuarial Aspects of the Determination Policy  
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested combining sections 3.2 and 3.4. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and made no change.  
Section 3.2(a)  
Comment 
 
 
Response Several commentators suggested deleting or modifying sections 3.2(a), 3.4.1(c), and 3.4.2.4 because 
the language is too prescriptive and best left to regulation. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and made no change in response to these 
comments . 
Section 3.2(b) 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  Several commentators expressed concern about the phrase “recouping past losses or distributing past 
gains” being too prescriptive or ambiguous and suggested either deleting that language or inserting 
“if required by statute or regulation” as a condition. 
 
The reviewers  disagree but added clarifying language to section 3.4.2.5 to address this comment . 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding back the guidance from the first exposure draft regarding 
prospective pattern of profits by duration in sections 3.2(b), 3.4.1(g), and 3.4.2.4(c). 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and therefore made no change.  
Section 3.2.1, Providing Advice on Developing or Modifying the Determination Policy 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested replacing the list (a)-(f) with a reference to section 3.1. 
 
The reviewers clarified the language in section 3.1 and the definition of NGE framework in section 
2.5, but made no change to this section  in response to this comment . 
Section 3.2.2, Providing Advice on Applying the Determination Policy 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested combining this section with section 3.2.1. 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change. 
Section 3.2.2(b)  
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested coordinating the reference to options with language in ASOP No. 7, 
Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty Insurer Cash Flows , on materiality, likelihood of 
antiselection, and impact on profitability metrics (“cash flows”). 
 
The reviewers added clarifying language to section 3.2.2(b).  
Section 3.2.2(d)  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator stated that the reference to reinsurance may be misconstrued as a requirement for 
post-reinsurance pricing. 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
Section 3.3, Establishment of or Changes to Policy Classes 
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested providing more guidance on the term “review.” 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and therefore made no change.  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding  consideration of contractual provisions before establishing or 
changing policy classes. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and note that section 3.3.1 states that “the actuary 
should take into account the policy provisions. ” 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 22Section 3.3.1, For Future Sales of a New or Existing Product 
Section 3.3.1(b) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator disagreed that policies can be assigned to more than one policy class. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and made no change. 
Section 3.3.1(e) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested deleting the item that says that the actuary should not expect to redefine 
policy classes after issue. 
 
The reviewers added clarifying language and examples to section 3.3.1. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “unless changes in anticipated experiences support changes to 
policy classes.” 
 
The reviewers made no change in this section but added clarifying language to address redefinition 
of policy classes  after issue in section 3.3.2.  
Section 3.3.2, For In-Force Policies 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator stated that this section should recognize that some policies cannot be reassigned if 
the actuary is limited by contract language. 
 
The reviewers believe this is covered in the requirement to follow the guidance in section 3.3.1 and 
made no change in response to this comment.  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested identifying and using a different example. 
 
The reviewers believe the example is appropriate and made no change. 
Section 3.4, Determination Process for NGE Scales 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding “the actuary should consider discussing these differences with 
management” in the last paragraph of section 3.4. 
 
The reviewers added clarifying language to section 3.4.  
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator questioned using the word “relationship” in (b) and (f). 
 
The reviewers clarified the language in sections 3.4(b) and (f) in response to this comment.  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested combining sections 3.2 and 3.4. 
 
The reviewers disagree with combining sections 3.2 and 3.4 but clarified the language in section 3.4 
to reference section 3.2 in its entirety.  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested that sections 3.4(f), 3.2.2(c), and 3.2.1(e) are inconsistent. 
 
The reviewers clarified the language in these sections to improve consistency. 
Section 3.4.1, Determination Process for Future Sales of a New or Existing Product 
Comment 
 
Response Two commentators suggested adding “if applicable” after “following.” 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change in response to this comment. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator questioned whether the section works for rates based on the market or based on an 
index. 
 
The reviewers added clarifying language to the definition of Nonguaranteed Element (NGE) in 
section 2.4 in response to this comment.  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 23Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that there is a bias in this section toward negative NGE changes and 
toward changes that are made infrequently, such as COI. 
 
The reviewers disagree that the language is biased toward negative NGE changes. The reviewers 
added an example of a change that could be made more frequently. 
Section 3.4.1(d)  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested (d) was redundant with (f) and suggested deleting (d). 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change. 
Section 3.4.1(g) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator found the reference to section 3.4.2.4, which then refers to section 3.2, circular 
and confusing and suggested deleting (g). 
 
The reviewers deleted the reference to section 3.4.2.4 and clarified the language in response to this 
comment.  
Section 3.4.2, Determination Process for In-Force Policies 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator said that it is unclear whether the anticipated experience factors being referenced 
are those that were identified in the past, those that are currently experienced, or those that are 
expected in the future. 
 
The reviewers believe the language of this section, as well as the definition of anticipated experience 
factor in section 2.1,  is clear and made no change.  
Section 3.4.2.1, Reviewing Prior Determinations  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “may” in the second sentence of the first paragraph. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change. 
Section 3.4.2.2, Analyzing Experience  
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator said that this section could be interpreted as saying that favorable past experience 
must be reflected in future anticipated experience factors and asked for clarification. 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator noted that experience can come from a variety of sources. 
 
The reviewers added item (b) to the list of examples in section 3.1 in response to this comment. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator said this section should not be limited to the determination of in-force policies. 
 
The reviewers note section 3.4.1(a) addresses consideration of how experience factors were 
developed for future sales of a new or existing product and therefore made no change in response to 
this comment . 
Section 3.4.2.3, Considering Whether to Recommend a Revision to NGE Scales  
Section 3.4.2.3(e)  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested replacing “at issue” and “in force” with “determination” and 
“redetermination,” respectively. 
 
The reviewers disagreed with the suggestion but clarified the use of the term “determination” in 
section 1. 2 in response to this comment.  
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 24Section 3.4.2.3(j)  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested replacing “policyholder” with “policyholder behavior.” 
 
The reviewers clarified the language. 
Section 3.4.2.4, Determining the Revised NGE Scales 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator questioned whether the reference to section 3.2 in this section conflicts with the 
reference to section 3.2 in the last paragraph of section 3.4. 
 
The reviewers clarified the language in the last paragraph of section 3.4.  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing “appropriate level of analysis” with language more similar to 
3.4.2.3(g). 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and made no change.  
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested combining sections 3.4.2.4 and 3.4.2.3. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and ma de no change.  
Section 3.4.2.4(a)  
Comment 
 
 
Response  Two commentators suggested deleting section 3.4.2.4(a) because “the reference to ‘under the terms 
of the policy and applicable law’ makes this a legal question, not an actuarial one.” 
 
The reviewers clarified the language.  
Section 3.4.2.4(c)  
Comment 
 
 
Response  Two commentators suggested deleting the “prospective pattern of profits by duration” from the 
example because it was too prescriptive. 
 
The reviewers clarified the language.  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting the entire example because this method may not be required by 
regulation. 
 
The reviewers kept the example but clarified the language.  
Section 3.4.2.5, Additional Considerations  
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding an example. 
 
The reviewers added an example.  
Section 3.5, NGEs Used in Illustrations Not Subject to ASOP No. 24  
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting this section, the related disclosure in section 4.1(q), and 
language related to ASOP No. 24,  Compliance with the NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations Model 
Regulation,  in section 1.2. 
 
The reviewers disagree but clarified language related to illustra tions not subject to ASOP No. 24.  
Section 3.6, Providing Regulatory Opinions and Disclosures (now Providing Opinions and Disclosures to 
Meet Regulatory Requirements)  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested clarifying the meaning of “regulatory opinion.” 
 
The reviewers clarified the language. 
ASOP No. 2—Doc. No. 204  
 25SECTION 4. COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES 
4.1, Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 
4.1 (p) 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested combining sections 4.1(p) and (g) because new anticipated experience 
factors don’t need special documentation. 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 48 
 
 
  
 
 
Life Settlements Mortality 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
Developed by the  
Life Settlements Mortality Task Force of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
December 2013 
 
Doc. No. 175 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 ii 
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S 
 
 
Transmittal Memorandum                  iv 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 1.2 Scope 1 1.3 Cross References 1 1.4 Effective Date 1 
 
Section 2.  Definitions 1 
2.2 Actual-to-Expected A/E) Analysis 1 2.1 A/E Ratio 1 2.3 Debits and Credits 1 2.4 Duration 2 2.5 Expected Deaths 2 2.6 Graduation 2 2.7 Historical A/E Mortality Basis 2 2.8 Impaired Mortality 2 2.9 Impairment 2 2.10 Incurred but not Reported Deaths 2 2.11 Incurred Death 2 2.12 Insured 2 2.13 Life Expectancy 2 2.14 Life Expectancy Provider 2 2.15 Life Settlement 2 2.16 Mean Life Expectancy 2 2.17 Median Life Expectancy 2 2.18 Modification Factor 3 2.19 Modified A/E Mortality Basis 3 2.20 Mortality Assumption 3 2.21 Mortality Multiple 3 
2.22 Survival Curve 3 
2.23 Underwriting 3 
 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3 
3.1 Purpose of the Assignment 3 3.2 Required Knowledge 3 3.3 Developing Mortality Assumptions 3 
3.3.1 Base Mortality Table Selection 3 3.3.2 Mortality Table Modifications 4 3.3.3 Mortality Improvement or Deterioration 4 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 iii3.3.4 Application of Individual Underw riting to Mortality Assumptions 4 
3.3.5 Mortality Assumption Adjustments Using A/E Analysis 4 
3.4 A/E Analysis 4 
3.4.1 Incurred Deaths 4 3.4.2 Multiple Life Expectancies for a Single Life 5 3.4.3 Use of a Modified A/E Mortality Basis 5 
3.5 Reliance on Data or Other In formation Supplied by Others 5 
3.6 Credibility of Data Used in Evaluation of Mortality 5 
3.7 Documentation 5 
 
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures 5 
4.1 Disclosures 5 4.2 Disclosures when Performing an A/E Analysis 6 4.3 Other Disclosures 6 
 
 
APPENDIXES 
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 8 
Background 8 Current Practices 9 
 
Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses 11 
 
 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 ivDecember 2013 
 TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons Interested in Reporting and 
Validation of Mortality used in Life Settlements Investments  
 FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ:   Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 48 
  This document contains the fi nal version of ASOP No. 48, Life Settlements Mortality .  
 
Background  
 
The life settlements market arose from the viatical  settlements market, which grew quickly in the 
1980s. Actuaries are involved in various aspect s of the market, including working with Life 
Expectancy (LE) providers to establish appropriate survival curves for risk appraisal, 
determining a value for a buyer who wishes to pu rchase a specific life insurance policy or 
portfolio, and valuing the polic ies in a portfolio for fina ncial reporting purposes. An 
understanding of mortality assumptions and of how individual risk assessment affects the 
mortality assumptions for individua l lives is critical to a proper  actuarial valuation and risk 
analysis. To date, actuarial practi ces have varied widely in this market, and there are no specific 
regulatory standards defining life settleme nts mortality tables or assumptions. 
 The life settlements market has demanded act ual-to-expected (A/E) results from the LE 
providers, but in the absence of specific guidelines and disclosures, practices  for calculating A/E 
results have varied widely. A limite d number of states require LE pr oviders to file A/E ratios, but 
again, lack of specific guidelines has led to co ncerns with mortality ta bles and methodologies 
used. At issue are survival curves defined for exposure measurement and methodologies for 
adjusting such curves to reflect individual ri sk assessments. Also, measurement of exposures 
based on multiple underwritings has posed significant difficulties.    Exposure Draft 
 In May 2013, the ASB approved the exposure draf t with a comment deadline of July 31, 2013.  
Ten comment letters were received and considered in making changes that are reflected in this 
final ASOP. For a summary of issues contained in these comment letters, please see appendix 
2. The majority of commentators supported th e effort to issue this ASOP, although a few 
comments indicated a concern with the scope of the ASOP, and one commentator believed this 
ASOP should not be issued.  Changes made to the final standard in respons e to the comment letters  include the following: 
 1. Sections 2.16, Mean Life Expectancy, and 2.17, Median Life Expectancy, were revised to 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 vremove examples of formulas that could be  used to calculate mean and median life 
expectancy. 
 2. Section 2.20, Mortality Assumpti on, was revised to include mo rtality rates and survival 
curves period by period. Survival curves are commonly used in the life settlements 
market to illustrate the mortality assumption. 
 
3. Section 4.1, Disclosures, was revised after c onsidering the feedback on a question raised 
in the exposure draft transmittal letter to requi re the actuary to disclose: a description of 
how the mortality assumption was developed and how the mortality assumption differs 
from that of the life expectancy provider, a description of how multiple life expectancy 
evaluations are handled (previ ously in section 4.2(f)), a nd the reason for choosing an 
IBNR assumption (if any).  
 
4.  Section 4.2, Disclosures when Performing A/E Analysis, was revised to allow the actuary 
to determine whether presentation of historical  A/E results is appropriate with appropriate 
disclosure if they are not presented.  
 Please see appendix 2 for a detailed discussion of the comments received and the reviewers’ 
responses.  The ASB thanks everyone who took the time to  contribute comments and suggestions on the 
exposure draft.  The ASB voted in December 2013 to adopt this standard.
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 vi 
Life Settlements Mortality Task Force 
 
Timothy A. DeMars, Chairperson 
Mary J. Bahna-Nolan Peter J. Bondy Jeremy J. Brown 
Vincent J. Granieri Linda M. Lankowski 
Scott E. Morrow Arshad H. Qureshi 
Larry H. Rubin 
   
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Jeremy J. Brown, Chairperson 
   David A. Brentlinger   David Y. Rogers    Dale S. Hagstrom   Barbara L. Snyder    James B. Milholland   Candace J. Wood 
  
  
Actuarial Standards Board 
   
Robert G. Meilander, Chairperson 
 Beth E. Fitzgerald   Thomas D. Levy  Alan D. Ford   Patricia E. Matson  Patrick J. Grannan   James J. Murphy  Stephen G. Kellison   James F. Verlautz 
 
   
The ASB establishes and improves  standards of actuarial practice . These ASOPs identify what 
the actuary should consider, document, and disc lose when performing an actuarial assignment . 
The ASB’s goal is to set standards for appropriate practice for the U.S.  
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 1ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF  PRACTICE NO. 48  
 
 
LIFE SETTLEMENTS MORTALITY  
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 
1.1 Purpose—This actuarial standard of practi ce provides guidance to actuaries developing 
and evaluating mortality assumptions  and evaluating mortality experience associated 
with life settlements . 
 
1.2 Scope—This standard applies to actuaries performing pr ofessional services, when 
reporting on or evaluating mortal ity experience with respect to life settlements  or when 
developing, analyzing, or using mortality assumptions  with respect to life settlements . 
 If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4. 
 
1.3 Cross References—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the original ly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date—This standard is effective for work performed on or after April 30, 2014.  
 
 
Section 2. Definitions 
 The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice. 
 2.1 Actual-to-Expected (A/E) Analysis—The process of calculating and analyzing A/E 
ratios  over a selected time period; for exam ple, across different ages, genders, and 
durations . This is also known as an A/E study.  
 2.2 Actual-to-Expected Ratio—Actual deaths (eit her face amount or number of lives) in a 
group of lives being ev aluated, over a specified period divided by the expected deaths  
over the same period.  
2.3 Debits and Credits—The components of a system  used by underwriters to determine a set 
of mortality multiples  to apply to a base mortalit y table. Debits increase the mortality 
multiple  due to various impairments  that an insured  may have; credits reduce the 
mortality multiple  due to good health characteristics. 
 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 22.4 Duration—The length of time since a life expectancy  estimate was issued. 
 
2.5 Expected Deaths—The number of  deaths statistically expected  in a given time interval.  
 
2.6 Graduation—The process of making adjustments to experience results in order to have a 
smooth progression in the mortality rates over the whole age range. 
 
2.7 Historical A/E Mortality Basis— Mortality assumptions  developed from a base 
mortality table using information such as underwriting  multipliers, improvement factors, 
medical records, and other pertinent inform ation relevant to th e individual life 
expectancies as of their associated underwriting  dates.  
 
2.8 Impaired Mortality—A mortality assumption  that has been adjusted for impairments .  
 
2.9 Impairment—A health factor or condition that tends to increase an insured’s  probability 
of death. 
 2.10 Incurred but not Reported (IBNR) Deaths—Adj ustment to observed deaths in a given 
time period to account for deaths that have o ccurred but have not been  reported due to the 
time lag in reporting systems or errors and incomplete information available from reporting sources regarding deaths.  
 
2.11 Incurred Death—A death occurring during a pe riod of exposure being analyzed, whether 
reported during that period or not.  
 
2.12 Insured—An individual whose life is covered by a life in surance policy.  
 
2.13 Life Expectancy (LE)—The expected future lifetime of an insured . Two primary types 
of life expectancies, mean and median, are reported by LE providers in the life 
settlements  market. 
 2.14 Life Expectancy Provider (LE Provider)—An entity that applies medical underwriting  
analysis to determine a mortality assumption  or life expectancy .  
 
2.15 Life Settlement—The life insura nce policy or policies sold to an investor. The term “life 
settlement” includes viatical and other life settlements.  Generally, a viatical life 
settlement is any life settlement where the insured  has a life expectancy  of less than two 
to three years, depending on state regulation.  
2.16  Mean Life Expectancy—The average life expectancy  based on the assumed survival 
curve .  
 
2.17  Median Life Expectancy—The point in time at which, based on the assumed survival 
curve , there is a 50% probability that the person will still be alive.  
  
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 32.18 Modification Factor—A factor that is used to  adjust standard mortality to reflect rating 
classification. This may include items such as  flat extras, mortality multiples, and age 
ratings. 
 2.19 Modified A/E Mortality Basis— Mortality assumptions  other than the historical A/E 
mortality basis . Use of this basis may result in life expectancy  estimates that differ from 
those originally provided.  
  
2.20 Mortality Assumption—A set of values represen ting mortality rates or  the survival curve 
period by period. This may reflect an assump tion of future mortality improvement or 
deterioration or modification factors . This term may apply to either a single insured  or 
group of insureds .  
 
2.21 Mortality Multiple—A modification factor  typically determined from a debit/credit  
underwriting  methodology.  
 
2.22 Survival Curve—The probability data set representing the assumed probability of 
survival to the end of every period in the future for an insured .  
 
2.23 Underwriting—The process of evaluating medical and other information received on a 
given insured  to determine modification factors  reflecting risk classification for that 
insured .  
  
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 3.1 Purpose of the Assignment—The actua ry should understand the purpose of the 
assignment and be familiar with any regulato ry or accounting standards that may have a 
bearing on the actuary’s work product. Assignmen ts that may result in different sets of 
mortality assumptions  include fair value valuation (for example, under Accounting 
Standards Codification 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures ) and performing 
or using an A/E study . 
 
3.2 Required Knowledge—The actuary should be reasonably knowledgeab le about relevant 
aspects of mortality table construction, exposure methods, mortality improvement, older 
age and impaired mortality , graduation , and related issues. 
 3.3 Developing Mortality Assumptions—When an actuary is developing mortality 
assumptions , the following apply.  
 3.3.1 Base Mortality Table Selection—The actuary  should select a base mortality table 
that is appropriate for the purpose of the assignment. The actuary should choose a 
table (which may be a comb ination of tables) that in  the actuary’s professional 
judgment reflects the characteristics of  the underlying population. The actuary 
may use credible data to create new mortality tables if existing tables do not adequately fit the underlying population. If  the actuary uses a mortality table 
prescribed by another party or applicable  law, the actuary should refer to ASOP 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 4No. 41, Actuarial Communications,  section 3.4.4, and the di sclosures in sections 
4.3(a) and (b) of this ASOP.   
3.3.2 Mortality Table Modifications—The actuary should consider whether 
modifications to the base mo rtality table(s) are needed  to fit the population being 
examined. In making these modifications, the actuary should consider items that 
may lead to a differentiation in mortalit y, such as socio-economic effect (i.e., a 
tendency for mortality rates to differ ba sed on sociologic and economic factors), 
antiselection, selection period, impairment (s), impairment  level, marketing 
methods, policies settled versus po licies evaluated but not sold as life 
settlements , and variations in LE estimates provided by different LE providers .  
 
3.3.3 Mortality Improvement or Deterioration—T he actuary should consider whether 
incorporating historical a nd projected mortality improve ment or deterioration is 
appropriate. These adjustments could be due to mortality improvement caused by medical advancements or new approved drugs, which could cause a shift in 
expected mortality for a group of insureds  within the population. 
 
3.3.4 Application of Individual Underwriting to  Mortality Assumptions—If the actuary 
has access to underwriting  information on individual insureds  in the population, 
the actuary should cons ider adjusting the mortality assumptions  to reflect this 
information. The actuary should consider using available data regarding factors 
such as the impairment (s), impairment  level, debits or credits  assigned, 
mortality multiples , and life expectancies and their associated survival curves , 
as appropriate for the pu rpose of the assignment. 
 
If LEs are used, the actuary should make a reasonable effort to learn and 
understand the basis for the LEs including whether the LE information provided 
is a mean  or median  LE. If the actuary has unres olved concerns about the LEs 
used that have a material impact, the actuary should make the disclosure in 
section 4.1(f). 
 3.3.5 Mortality Assumption Adjustments Usi ng A/E Analysis—The actuary should 
consider adjusting mortality assumptions  when A/E results are available. 
 3.4 A/E Analysis—When performing an A/E analysis , the actuary should produce results by 
duration . As data and credibility allow, the actuary should analyze results by gender, 
smoking class, age bands, level of mortality multiples , impairment  type, and other 
pertinent categories.   3.4.1 Incurred Deaths—The actuary should be aware of the methodology and sources 
used in determining incurred deaths  and the completeness of such approach for 
determining deaths. The actuary should cons ider whether to adjust actual results 
to reflect IBNR  deaths. The actuary should consider using a supplemental 
external source of recorded deaths, such as  the Social Security Death Master File, 
if available, to improve the timeliness of reported deaths. 
 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 53.4.2 Multiple Life Expectancies for a Single Life—The actuary should assess whether 
the method for handling data regarding an insured  underwritten multiple times 
(and creating multiple exposures) is appropr iate for the intended use of the A/E 
study, given the reasons a specific insured  was underwritten more than once. If 
the actuary uses a method prescribed by a nother party, the actuary should refer to 
ASOP No. 41, section 3.4.4, and the disclosure s in section 4.3(a) and (b) of this 
ASOP. 
 
3.4.3 Use of a Modified A/E Mortality Basis— The actuary may anal yze results based 
on a historical A/E mortality basis  or a modified A/E mortality basis . If a 
modified A/E mortality basis  is used, the actuary shoul d prepare results using a 
historical A/E mortality basis  for comparative purposes, if the actuary believes 
doing so is appropriate . The actuary should refer to Section 4.2 (e). 
 3.5 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others—When relying on data or 
other information supplied by others, the actuary should refe r to ASOP No. 23, Data 
Quality , for guidance. 
 3.6 Credibility of Data Used in Evaluation of Mortality—When considering the credibility of 
the data used in setting assumptions, th e actuary should refer to ASOP No. 25, Credibility 
Procedures , for guidance. 
 3.7 Documentation—The actuary should prepar e and retain documen tation in compliance 
with the requirements of ASOP No. 41. The actuary should also prepare and retain 
documentation to demonstrate compliance with the disclosure requirements of section 4. 
  
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 
 4.1 Disclosures—When issuing actuarial co mmunications relating to mortality in life 
settlements , the actuary should refer to ASOP Nos. 23, 25, and 41. In addition, the 
actuary should disclose  the following items: 
a. a description of how the mortality assumption  was developed including any 
modifications to the mortality assumption  to reflect risk characteristics; 
b. a description of the methods used to ad just results for the impact of multiple life 
expectancy  evaluations on the same insured  or on the same policy; 
c. whether the actuary has information about the LE provider’s  mortality 
assumption and, if so, how the actuary’s mortality assumption  differs from that 
of the LE provider ;  
d. the extent of historical or projected mortality impr ovement or deterioration 
assumed for the assignment;  
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 6e. the method used for determining incurred deaths , including any IBNR  
assumption, and discussion of the signifi cance and reason for choosing such 
IBNR  assumption;  
f. any unresolved concerns the actuary may have about the data, assumptions used, 
or methodology used that could have a ma terial impact on the actuarial work 
product;  
g. the mortality assumption  for estimating the price that would be received to sell 
the asset in an orderly transaction between  market participants, and the basis for 
that assumption, when performing work related to fair-v alue projections; 
4.2 Disclosures when Performing an A/E Analysis —In addition to the disclosures in section 
4.1, the actuary should disclose the following items if an A/E analysis  is performed: 
 
a. the source of the expected mortality assumptions  and why the actuary believes 
they were appropriate for the assignment; 
 
b. results of the A/E analysis  by duration ; 
 
c. as data and credibility allow, a presen tation of results by gender, smoking class, 
age bands, level of mortality multiples , impairment  type, and other pertinent 
categories; 
 
d. whether a historical A/E mortality basis  or a modified A/E mortality basis  was 
used for the A/E analysis . Such disclosure should indicate the implications of the 
method, the reasons for the choice of method, and whether the method could 
distort the results of the analysis; 
 
e. if results on a modified A/E mortality basis are disclosed, the actuary should 
disclose results based on a historical A/E mortality basis  for comparative 
purposes if the actuary believes doing so is appropriate . If results on a modified 
A/E mortality basis  are disclosed and the actuary does not disclose historical 
A/E mortality basis  results, the actuary should disc lose why they are not being 
disclosed;  
 
f. a description of the methods used to ad just results for the impact of multiple 
policies on the same insured ;  
 
g. when IBNR  is included in the analysis, a pres entation of results with and without 
IBNR ; and 
 
h. a statement that A/E results may not be indicative of future results.  
 
4.3 Other Disclosures—The actuary should include the following, as applicable, in an 
actuarial communication: 
 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 7a. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.2, if any material assumption or method was 
prescribed by applicable law; 
b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility  for any material assumption or method 
selected by a party other than the actuary; and 
c. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.4, if , in the actuary’s professional judgment, 
the actuary has otherwise deviated materi ally from the guidance of this ASOP. 
 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 8Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 Note:  This appendix is provided for informational pur poses and is not part of the standard of 
practice. 
 
 
Background 
 Life Settlements are financial transactions in wh ich a third party buys an existing life insurance 
policy for more than its cash surrender value but less than its net de ath benefit. The life 
settlements market grew out of the viatical settlements market, where chronically ill AIDS 
patients sold their policies, of ten to individual investors. Th e viatical settlements market 
essentially ended with the adve nt of antiretroviral drugs, whic h extended the lives of AIDS 
patients, lowering the economic va lue of their life insurance polic ies. From there, the market 
focus shifted to other health -impaired policyholders, primar ily at older attained ages. 
 In the life settlements market, a mortality assumption is de termined, which allows the buyer to 
project expected premiums, death benefits, and other relevant cash flows period by period. These 
expected cash flows are then discounted to de termine the policy value. To determine the 
mortality assumption for an insure d, it is common to use life e xpectancy (LE) estimates, often 
measured in months, produced by LE providers. Th e accuracy of the LE estimates is of great 
interest to the life settlements market since th e value of a policy is highly dependent on the 
mortality assumption derived based on the LE estimate.   The life settlements market is highl y dependent on actuarial expertis e. In particular, analysis of 
actual mortality experience as compared to expectations (actual/expected or A/E analysis) has generated controversy in the life settlements market.  
 An A/E study is a backward-looking evaluati on of underwriting results based on assumed 
mortality. The mortality assumption may be ba sed on the mortality tables and modification 
factors used to produce the original LE estimate.  At times, the mortality assumptions may be 
modified to reflect factors releva nt to current LE estimates so that past results may be measured 
against current underwriting methodologies and tables.  
 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 9 
 
Current Practices  
 
Actuaries working in the life settlements market have been asked to assess mortality for many 
different purposes, including the following:  
 an A/E study of an LE provider;  
 the determination of survival curves for an LE provider; 
 the pricing/modeling of life se ttlements policies and portfolio s on behalf of investors; 
 the valuation for fina ncial reporting; and 
 risk models to examine extension risk and its consequences for investor performance. 
 
The discussion below focuses on A/E studies, which have been central to the life settlements 
market and an area of interest in life settlement discussions. Ho wever, as noted above, there are 
several other mortality-related tasks that actuaries may be asked to perform.   An actuary performing an A/E st udy on a block of lives or po licies has several options for 
creating mortality assumptions fo r individual lives. The analyses  differ regarding whether the 
original LE provider’s mortality as sumption is adjusted. A historical  A/E mortality basis utilizes 
the LE provider’s methodology in use at the time each LE was issued. Two modified A/E 
mortality bases used today are as follows:   1. Adjusted to Current Methodology A/E Morta lity basis—A/E analysis that typically 
defines expected deaths using mortality ta bles, underwriting multip liers, improvement 
factors, and any other asp ects of the underwriter’s curre nt methodology applied to the 
medical records and any other pertinent inform ation for each insured that existed at the 
time the insured was underwritten. This attempts to measure how accurate the LE provider’s current methodology is by back-testing it to obtain the A/E analysis that would 
have developed if the LE provider’s current methodology had been in place from the time it began issuing LEs.  
 
2. Back-solving the actual LE into a mortality table—A/E analysis that defines expected 
deaths by using the back-solving method with the actual LE that was issued and mortality 
assumptions that may or may not have actually been used when the LE was issued by the LE provider. This has commonly been used wh en the LE provider’s table is proprietary, 
non-existent, deemed not relevant, or in the actuary’s judgment is not appropriate for the 
life settlement popula tion being studied. 
 In performing an A/E study, there are several methods that are used to handle multiple 
underwriting opinions on individu al lives. The results of the A/ E study can vary substantially 
depending on the method chosen. Some of th e methods in use today are as follows: 
 1. Earliest submission—Counts only the earliest LE  estimate produced for each insured. As 
a result, no single insured counts more than any other. This method does not reflect all 
instances of underwriting. 
 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 102. Latest submission—Counts only the latest  LE estimate produced for each insured. 
Considerations are th e same as in method 1. This method excludes time periods where it 
is known that no deaths occurred.  
 
3. One-year look-back—Includes only the late st LE estimate within each calendar year.  
 
4. Fractional method—The earliest LE estimate c ontributes one exposure up until the time 
that the insured is underwritt en a second time, at which poi nt each contributes half an 
exposure. Repeat as necessary. Only one tota l exposure per year per insured is used, and 
a subject contributes only one  death in the calculation. 
 
5. Non-fractional method—Several LE estimates  may be used for one insured. Possible 
reasons for inclusion depend on time elapsed since prior LE opinion used or material 
change in health status. One insured that  has been underwritten many times may have a 
much larger impact on the A/E results than  another insured who was underwritten once. 
 For A/E studies, there have been a wide range  of adjustments made to account for IBNR. The 
level of IBNR chosen is crucial since the result s of the A/E analysis c ould vary substantially. 
Given the age of the life settlements market, data availability , and the reliability of the methods 
used to determine deaths that have occurred, dete rmining the appropriate IBNR level is difficult.  
 To the extent experience is available, a lag st udy is sometimes performed on the historical level 
of IBNR experienced. The results of the lag study, to the extent  credible, are then used to 
determine the level of IB NR. Often a lag study is not feasible . In utilizing other resources to 
determine the level of IBNR, such as social secu rity information, some practitioners account for 
differences between the populati on of life settlement particip ants and the population being 
considered. A further problem is that the met hodologies for determining maturities may change 
over time, as has happened when access to the Soci al Security Death Mast er File became more 
restricted.   
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 11Appendix 2 
 
Comments on Exposure Draft and Responses 
 
The exposure draft of this ASOP, Life Settlements Mortality , was issued in May 2013 with a 
comment deadline of July 31, 2013. Ten comment le tters were received, some of which were 
submitted on behalf of multiple commentators, su ch as by firms or committees. For purposes of 
this appendix, the term “commentator” may refer to more than one person associated with a 
particular comment letter. The Life Settlement s Task Force carefully considered all comments 
received, reviewed the exposure draft, and pr oposed changes. The Life Committee and the ASB 
reviewed the proposed changes and ma de modifications where appropriate. 
 Summarized below are the signifi cant issues and questions contai ned in the comment letters and 
responses.  The term “reviewers” in appendix 2 includes the Life Settlements Task Force, the Life 
Committee, and the ASB. Also, unless otherwise not ed, the section numbers and titles used in 
appendix 2 refer to those in the exposure draft. 
 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Comment 
 
 
 
 
Response One commentator asked whether the standard applies to valuation work involved in 
calculating the “theoretical” Fair Market Value of individual life policies. If so, may an 
actuary simply rely on a survival table produced by one independent LE provider or would 
more than one be required? 
 
The reviewers believe the standard does apply to  certain aspects (see section 1.2, Scope) of 
valuation assignments involved in calculating the “theoretical” Fair Market Value of 
individual policies with respect to life settlements and feel that the guidance in the standard is 
appropriate.  
Comment   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Response One commentator noted that the standard seems to have two very different goals: 
 
1. guidance on appropriate calculation of actual-to-expected results for mortality; and 
2. dealing with appropriate documentation for the selection and use of mortality 
assumptions with respect to Life Settlement reports per ASOP No. 41, Actuarial 
Communications . 
 
The commentator stated that the actuarial profe ssion should carefully consider whether it is 
truly in its best interest to attempt to meet this need via an ASOP. 
 
The commentator also suggested that this draft be  bifurcated into two different standards. If 
this is not viable, then the drafters should be  explicitly clear so that one purpose does not 
overwhelm the other and confuse readers. 
 The reviewers believe a single standard is appropriate.  
Comment   
 
 Response One commentator suggested adding a paragraph in  the background section of the transmittal 
memo that discusses the difficulties of using LE estimates from multiple LE providers. In addition, the commentator suggests the appendix should include these points. Otherwise, the 
document should be limited to A/E calculations. 
 The reviewers do not believe this discussion is necessary in the transmittal memo or the 
appendix. The transmittal memo and appendix ar e not meant to provide guidance. Therefore, 
no change was made. 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 12Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the background section of the transmittal memo mention 
that actuaries are globally involved.  
 
The standard applies to actuarial practice only in the U.S.; therefore, no change was made. 
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator believed it is not correct to state that actuaries are involved in all aspects of 
the market in the background section of the tr ansmittal memo. It should be made clear that 
actuaries are not underwriters. The commentator  suggested changing “all” to “various.” 
 The reviewers agree and changed “all” to “various.” 
Comment  Response One commentator suggested that the standard address in course of settlement claims. 
 The reviewers believe that these cl aims would be either in report ed claims or incurred but not 
reported claims and made no change. 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested the standard address stochastic analysis in determining suitable 
confidence intervals for actua l deaths when performing Actual-to-Expected studies. 
 
The reviewers believe that such practice would be permitted under the standard and made no 
change. 
Comment  
 
Response Two commentators suggested the standard address how monthly mortality rates are 
determined from annual mortality rates. 
 
The reviewers disagree with expanding the sta ndard to address the subject and made no 
change. 
Comment  
 
  
 
 
Response One commentator stated that in some cases th e actuary has only the (mean or median) Life 
Expectancy number, which was calculated by some one other than a qualified actuary, to use 
as a single data point in backing into an assumed table of mortality rates, and the actuary 
often isn’t told how that one data point was determined. Because of this, the commentator cannot support the actuarial prof ession accrediting and codifying the use of these practices as 
sound actuarial practice through publication in an Actuarial Standard of Practice. 
 
The reviewers believe the ASOP appropriately addresses this co ncern, and therefore made no 
change.  
Comment  
 
  
 
Response One commentator stated that ac tuaries should aggregate mortality experience data properly 
recorded and then contributed by the major companies in the industry, develop a credible 
experience table applicable to that business, and then create from that table suitable mortality 
tables to be used for pricing, valuation, and other financial risk management for their principals. 
 
The reviewers believe this is beyond the scope of the ASOP and made no change. 
Comment  
 
  
Response One commentator stated that there is not much life settlement data at many ages; therefore, it 
is up to the actuary to consider how to determine reasonable mortality for life settlements. 
The commentator stated that both a suitable underlying mortality table and system of 
mortality ratios for impairments is needed and must be considered reasonable by the actuary.  
The reviewers believe the guidance in the standard is appropriate and made no change. 
Comment  
  
Response One commentator stated that the same LE can be generated by more than one mortality table, 
including modifiers. Therefore, it is important that the actuary review LEs at many different 
ages and mortality levels or review the basic mortality curve and modifiers.  
The reviewers believe the guidance in the standard is appropriate and made no change. 
Comment  
  
 
Response One commentator stated that mortality multiples can be determined from a debit/credit 
underwriting methodology, but can also be based on actuarial and underwriting studies that 
develop the relationship between standard morta lity and the mortality on a life with particular 
impairments. 
 
The reviewers believe the ASOP adequately provides for this and made no change. 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 13Comment 
 
 
  
Response One commentator stated that the purpose and scop e of this ASOP is aimed at actuaries doing 
mortality and A/E studies for life expectancy providers in the life settlements market. The 
commentator believes it should be pointed out th at there are other uses of life expectancies 
and anticipated mortality, such  as for financial planning. 
 
The reviewers agree LEs can be used for other reasons; however, the purpose of the ASOP 
was to address life settlements mortality. Therefore, no changes were made. 
TRANSMITTAL MEMO RANDUM QUESTIONS 
Question 1: Life expectancy providers may provide surv ival curves with their estimates. As drafted, this 
standard does not require disclosure when the actu ary chooses a different surv ival curve assumption. 
Should it? 
Comment 
 
 Response Four commentators believed the actuary should disclose whether a survival curve assumed is 
different from that of th e life expectancy provider. 
 The reviewers agree and added a disclosure requirement in the new section 4.1(c). 
Comment 
 
  
 
  
Response One commentator believed this question makes the assumption that the normal practice is for 
the actuary to use the survival curve as pr ovided by the LE provider. The commentator 
suggested a change in language to demonstrate this is not necessarily the case.  
The commentator believed it is most important for the actuary to disclose how the LE 
provider reports are used.  
The reviewers revised section 4.1(a) to requir e a description of how the mortality assumption 
was developed. 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator stated that the level of disclosure for setting mortality assumptions for a 
life settlement population should be the same as that required for other types of calculations. 
 
The reviewers believe the disclosure level in the standard is appropriate and made no change. 
Question 2: Methodologies for Actual to Expected studies for life settlements may vary depending on the 
purpose of the study. The task force chose to define  a “historical method” as being distinct from any 
number of “modified methods.” Is this distinction clea r? Is it clear when a historical method is required? 
Comment Three commentators believed the distinction was clear and adequate. 
Comment 
  
Response Some commentators question whether results based on a “historical method” should be 
required. They suggested the requirement either be removed or allow the actuary to decide on whether the disclosure of results based on a “historical method” is appropriate. 
 
The reviewers revised the wording in sections 3.4.3 and 4.2(e) to allow the actuary to decide whether it is appropriate to prepare and disclose historical results.  
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that these terms be clarified for the benefit of other actuaries that 
do not have a lot of experience in this area. 
 The reviewers agree and clarified the terms in response to the comment. 
Question 3: Are the disclosures required in this standard su fficient and clear? 
Comment One commentator believed the disclosures are sufficient and clear. 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator believed the disclosures are redundant and noted that the standard states 
“the actuary should refer to ASOP [No.] 41.” In addition, items 4.1(f), 4.1(g), and 4.1(h) refer 
to specific sections of ASOP No. 41. 
 
The reviewers believe some level of redundancy is useful and retained the draft wording, noting that section 4.1(f), 4.1(g), and 4.1(h) are employed in other standards. These items 
were moved to a new section 4.3. 
Question 4: One insured may have ha d multiple life expectan cy estimates. Are the disclosures for handling 
this situation appropriate? 
Comment Two commentators believed the disclosures are appropriate. 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 14Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator believed the standard requires disclosure of the handling of multiple life 
expectancy estimates only when the method is prescribed by another party. 
 
The disclosure was moved from section 4.2 to 4.1, which is not limited to the situation where the method is prescribed by another party. 
SECTION 1. PURPOSE, SCOPE, CROSS REFERENCES, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
Section 1.1, Purpose 
Comment   
 
 Response One commentator believes one of the intents of the standard is for the purpose of developing 
mortality assumptions (as in section 3.3). The commentator recommended new wording: “...to actuaries developing and evaluating mo rtality assumptions, and evaluating mortality 
experience, associated….”  
 The reviewers adjusted the description to be more general. The reviewers decided to use 
some of the recommended new wording in section 1.2, Scope.  
Section 1.2, Scope 
Comment 
  
 
 Response One commentator stated that the scope of the proposed ASOP appears so broad that it 
includes virtually all actuarial work with regard to life settlements but is entirely focused on A/E calculations. The commentator suggested that the scope of the ASOP should be more 
specific. 
 The reviewers note section 1.2, Scope, is limited to certain types of work related to mortality 
and that the guidance is not limited to A/E calculations. 
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS 
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator found the phrase “historical method” (historical A/E analysis in the 
definitions) confusing and believes a “modified method” is not so much a modified method 
as an alternative expected basis. 
 The reviewers agree and changed the terms to improve clarity. 
Section 2.3, Debits and Credits 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator found this very  unclear. The commentator aske d whether debits and credits 
should be described in terms of percentages added to, or subtracted from, 100% of “standard” 
morality for the age and gender. The commentator thought an example might help.  
The reviewers believe the definition is clear and made no change. 
Section 2.4, Duration 
Comment  
Response One commentator asked: “Is it always m easured in years? Never in months?” 
 
The reviewers deleted “measured in years” from the definition. 
Section 2.5, Expected Deaths 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator suggested that the standard  provide guidance on calculating expected 
deaths.  
 
The reviewers disagree with expanding the sta ndard to address the subject and made no 
change. 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator found this very unclear. The commentator suggested working the term 
“mortality assumption” into the definition, so that it can be referenced when defining 
Historical A/E Analysis an d Modified A/E Analysis. 
 
The definition was modified to make it clearer, and, given the new definition, the reviewers 
concluded that including the term “mortality assumption” was not necessary. 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 15 
Section 2.7, Historical A/E Analysis 
Comment 
 
  
 
 Response One commentator recommended the following definition: “A/E analysis based upon expected 
mortality rates consistent with those underl ying the providers’ life expectancies and 
incorporating, as available, the mortality tables, underwriting multipliers, improvement factors, and other pertinent information used by the providers in determining the life 
expectancies.” 
 The reviewers adjusted the definition of a “His torical A/E Analysis” (now referred to as 
“Historical A/E Mortality Basis” ) to refer to “mortality assumptions” rather than “mortality 
tables.” The reviewers did not specify “pr oviders” in the definition because there are 
situations where a historical A/E analysis is performed using original mortality assumptions 
that were not provided by an LE provider.  
Comment  
Response One commentator pointed out that the term “mortality tables” is used, but it is not defined. 
 
The reviewers changed “mortality tables” to “mortality assumptions.” 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator suggested the phrase be re worded as follows: “…and other pertinent 
information applicable to the individual life exp ectancies as of their associated underwriting 
dates.” 
 
The reviewers added the suggested wording with minor modifications. 
Section 2.10, Incurred but no t Reported (IBNR) Deaths 
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator suggested the following wording: “Deaths occurring during a period of 
exposure being analyzed but not reported during that period. Usually estimated based on past 
experience.” 
 The reviewers believe the existing definition is appropriate and made no change. 
Section 2.11, Incurred Claim 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested the following wording: “A death occurring during a period of 
exposure being analyzed, whether reported during that period or not.” 
 
The reviewers implemented the suggested wording. 
Section 2.13, Life Expectancy (LE) 
Comment 
 Response Two commentators suggested grammatical changes to the definition. 
 The reviewers revised the definition.  
Section 2.14, Life Expectan cy Provider (LE Provider) 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator suggested deleting the phrase “specializing in the assessment of older or 
impaired lives.” The commentator noted that LE providers determine life expectancies on 
young lives as well as old, and on unimpaired as well as impaired, lives.  
The reviewers deleted the phrase “specializing in the assessment of older or impaired lives.” 
Comment 
 Response One commentator suggested changing “underwriting services” to “underwriting analysis.” 
 The reviewers agree and made the change. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested the second sent ence about being the underwriter is not 
necessary. 
 
The reviewers agree and deleted the sentence. 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested adding a sentence such  as, “LE Provider is not limited to those 
entities who have sought and obtained official status as such by any of the states.”  
The reviewers do not believe the additional se ntence suggested is necessary and made no 
change. 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 16 
Section 2.16, Mean Life Expectancy 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested changing  the formula to an integral. 
 
The reviewers believe that the formula is unnecessary and deleted it. 
Comment  
Response One commentator believes the term “m ean life expectancy” is redundant. 
 
The reviewers believe the term “mean life expectancy” is necessary because of the 
terminology used in the life settlements market. 
Comment   
Response One commentator suggested adding “The averag e life expectancy; also referred to as the 
actuarial or complete life expectancy.”  
The reviewers do not believe the additional terms are necessary and made no change. 
Comment 
  
 
 Response One commentator stated that it seems unwise to specify a particul ar formula, especially when 
the formula is an approximation of the comple te expectation formula and in a more exacting 
context would be written without an equal sign. Perhaps the formula given should be 
characterized as an example. 
 The reviewers believe that the formula is unnecessary and deleted it. 
Comment   
Response One commentator was surprised to see “mean” and “median” life expectancies defined in 
terms of months, since most mortality estimates are annual.  
The reviewers have adjusted the definitions to be more generic. The unit of time is no longer 
specified.  
Section 2.17, Median Life Expectancy 
Comment  
Response One commentator suggested a change in the stat ed formula from a summation to an integral. 
 
The reviewers believe that the formula is unnecessary and deleted it.  
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator believes “predicted median su rvival” or simply “median survival” would 
be a better term to use than “median life exp ectancy.” The commentato r suggested changing 
the description to “…the smallest number m satisfying….” 
 The term “median life expectancy” is used in the life settlements market. The reviewers 
decided no change to the term was necessary. The reviewers determined that a formula was 
unnecessary. 
Section 2.18, Modification Factor 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator suggested replacing “reflect ra ting classification” with “reflect impaired 
mortality.” 
 
The reviewers believe the term “rating classifi cation” encompasses preferred, standard, and 
impaired cases and made no change. 
Section 2.21, Mortality Multiple 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator suggested the definition be changed to “A modification factor typically 
determined from a debit/credit underwriting methodology used to create a multiple intended 
to be applied to a standard mortality risk table.”  
The reviewers note mortality multiples in the life settlements market may be applied to 
preferred, standard, or impaired risk tables and made no change. 
Section 2.22, Survival Curve 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator stated that “Read literally, this means that there is one ‘curve,’ or set of 
probabilities, for each  insured age x.” 
 The reviewers disagree, as the de finition refers to “an insured.” 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 17Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator asked whether the definition was intended to mean that each “curve” is a 
set, or table, of survival probabilities for all values of t from 1 to ω–x.  
 
The reviewers believe the wording is clear and made no change. 
Section 2.23, Underwriting 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “and/or es timating life expectancy” after “…reflecting 
risk classification….” 
 
The definition is meant to address the underwr iting process rather than LE estimation. The 
reviewers made no change.  
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Section 3.2, Required Knowledge 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator stated that section 3.2 sets out  the requirement that an actuary “should be 
knowledgeable” about a variety of topics, with no limitations on this requirement.   
Another commentator asked whether the subject s included are in the current syllabus for 
actuarial exams. The commentator suggested in cluding recommended sources if the subject is 
covered. If not, the commentator asked whether sources should be included. The 
commentator asked, “If the ABCD is to determine whether a practicing actuary has the 
‘required knowledge,’ on what will its opinion be based?”  
The reviewers note that the actuary needs to apply judgment in determining the degree of 
knowledge needed in a particular situation. The reviewers added the word “reasonably” and 
words “relevant aspects of.” 
Section 3.3.1, Base Mortality Table Selection 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator suggested that some context be provided for the use of the word 
“population.” The commentator was concerned that some r eaders would not understand 
“population” refers to “appropriate population.”  
The reviewers changed “population” to “underlying population.” 
Section 3.3.2, Mortality Table Modifications 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “For exam ple, policy face amount may be utilized as a 
proxy for the socio- economic effect.” 
 
The reviewers do not believe such an example is needed and, therefore, made no change. 
Section 3.3.4, Application of Individual Underwriting to Mortality Assumptions 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator believes the current wording does not clearly distinguish the actuarial role 
from the underwriting role. 
 The reviewers disagree and made no change. 
Comment 
 
 
 
  
 
Response One commentator stated that the mortality experience for life settlements is available only for 
a limited portion of the survival curve. Therefore, consideration must be given to the lack of 
long-term experience and the selection of ultimate mortality. Consideration should be given 
to the “wearing off” of underwriting rating by which preferred or substandard extra mortality 
may be graded toward zero as the insured surviv es well beyond the original LE or reaches the 
ultimate age in the mortality table. 
 
The reviewers believe that mortality multiples can encompass wearing off and other factors affecting ultimate mortality and made no change.  
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 18 
Section 3.3.5, Mortality Assumption Adjustments Using A/E Analysis 
Comment 
 
  
 
  
Response One commentator suggested adding the following : “Adjustments should be considered to A/E 
assumptions reflecting the specific experience of the population (i.e. the life settlement 
portfolio), and then the experience of the specific LE Provider. Mortality tables designed for life insurance valuation (for example, 2008VBT) have implicit conservatism for life 
insurance that produce aggressive assumptions for life settlements and are not appropriate 
without adjustments.”  
The reviewers disagree with expanding the sta ndard to address the subject and made no 
change. 
Section 3.4, Actual-to-Expected Analysis 
Comment 
 
  
 
Response One commentator believed this section ignores that one of the main contributors to wide 
variation in historical A/E results is the impact of the underlying mortality table. The 
commentator believes that any A/E results crossing time periods where the underlying mortality tables vary greatly cannot be reason ably combined. 
 
The reviewers note, in performing mortality st udies, the actuary needs to make judgments 
about which data to use and how to adjust the data and made no change.  
Section 3.4.1, Incurred Claims 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested replacing “Incu rred Claims” with “I ncurred Deaths” or 
“Incurred Maturities.” 
 The reviewers changed the te rm to “Incurred Deaths.” 
Comment 
 
  
 
Response One commentator suggested the following: “The  actuary should consider whether any IBNR 
assumption is reasonable based on supporting analysis or lack thereof. If there is no data to 
support an IBNR assumption, it should be sufficient for the actuary to disclose that they have assumed zero IBNR or provided for a short delay in reporting.” 
 
The reviewers changed “adjusting”  to “whether to adjust.” 
Section 3.4.2, Multiple Life Ex pectancies for a Single Life 
Comment 
 
 
  
Response One commentator asked if the method used should be consistent with the method used in 
analyses of life-insurance mortality experien ce. The commentator suggested the standard 
state whether the method is or is not consistent and explain and justify the reason if it is 
different.  
There are several methods used in the analyses  of life-insurance mortality experience. In 
addition, there are several issues that are un ique to the life settlements market that might 
necessitate using a different method. For these reasons, the reviewers decided to not require 
the explanation of any differences and made no change. 
Section 3.4.3, Use of a Modified A/E Analysis 
Comment  
 
 Response One commentator suggested adding the phrase, “the modifications made shall be explicitly 
and completely disclosed and,” after the introductory phrase, “If a modified A/E method is 
used.” 
 The reviewers believe section 4 appropriately ad dresses the concerns of  the commentator and 
made no change. 
SECTION 4. COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES 
Comment  
  
Response One commentator suggested that section 4.2 be presented as section 4.1 and the section 4.1 be 
moved to section 4.2 and titled “Disclosures under other Actuarial Communications utilizing 
Life Settlement Mortality.”  
The reviewers believe disclosures for all situa tions should be listed first and disclosures for 
specific situations should be listed second. The disclosures related to ASOP No. 41 were moved to the new section 4.3. 
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 19Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested section 4.1 and section 4.2 be renumbered 4.1.1, 4.1.2, etc. 
 
The reviewers disagree and note the numbering system follows standard ASOP formatting, 
and made no change. 
Section 4.1, Disclosures 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator suggested an item be added to section 4.1 for something like “the method 
used for interpreting and utilizing results from LE Providers.” 
 
The reviewers revised section 4.1(a) to requir e a description of how the mortality assumption 
was developed. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that item 4.1(c) (incurred claims and IBNR) be removed since it 
will generally apply only to A/E calculations. 
 
The reviewers believe the disclosure is necessary for more than just A/E calculations and 
made no change. 
Comment 
 Response One commentator believed item 4.1(e) sh ould reflect purchases and sales. 
 The wording was adjusted to reflect market participants. 
Comment 
 
 
  
 
Response On 4.1(e), one commentator stated “This is an area that deserves special caution. The actuary 
should clearly communicate that he/she cannot  assign a ‘market value’ or determine a 
‘market mortality assumption,’ because that will vary widely depending on the outlook of the 
individual buyer/seller. This additional unknown should be documented with the rationale for the actuary’s estimate.” 
 
The reviewers believe the disclosures discussed in sections 3.4.1 and 4.1.3(d) of ASOP No. 41 regarding risk and uncertainty address the issue raised and made no change.  
Section 4.2, Disclosures when Performing an A/E Analysis 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested adding a requirement to disclose the total A/E results in addition 
to the durational requirement set forth in 4.2(b).  
The reviewers do not believe this should be a requirement and made no change. 
Comment 
 
 
  
Response On 4.2 (e), one commentator stat ed that the purpose of the historical A/E comparison is not 
clear from the ASOP. Such a comparison may not  be useful for the actuary’s or client’s 
purposes. The ASOP should recommend, but not require, a historical A/E analysis for 
comparative purpose only if it meet s the purpose of the analysis. 
 
The reviewers revised the wording to allow the actua ry to disclose that historical A/E analysis 
results are not being presented and why.  
APPENDIX: BACKGROUND AND CURRENT PRACTICE 
Comment 
 
  
 
  
Response One commentator suggested removing the last sentence in the paragraph on “Adjusted to 
Current Methodology A/E analysis” (see Current Practices section of Appendix 1) where it is 
stated that an Adjusted analysis “attempts to address the question of how accurate the LE 
provider’s estimates are today.” The commentat or believes this statement inappropriately 
implies that historical A/E analyses are not  relevant in addressing how accurate the LE 
provider’s estimates are today.  
The reviewers agree and revised the last sent ence to address the comm entator’s concern.  
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator suggested deleting the statemen t regarding “the main deficiency” of using 
the “Latest submission” (see Current Practices) method. The commentator believes this 
reflects an inappropriate bias. 
 The reviewers agree and delete d the last two sentences.  
ASOP No. 48—December 2013 
 
 20Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator stated that the discussion in the background section is limited to buyers of 
policies and suggested that this be adju sted to reflect buyers “and sellers.” 
 
The reviewers believe the discussion provides a good overview of the market and made no change.  
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator suggested that the background section reflect the fact that part of the 
problem with the life settlement market is that the participants in the market often do not 
utilize qualified actuaries at all or may utilize non-credentialed actuaries.  
The reviewers believe the suggested statement is not appropriate in this particular document 
and made no change. 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator was surprised that the standard  does not comment on the industry practice 
of measuring LEs in months rather than year s. The commentator feels that this industry 
practice gives the non-actuarial investor community a sense of spurious accuracy. 
 
The reviewers agree that the industry practice of measuring LEs in months should be 
mentioned and adjusted the wordin g in the background section. 
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 40 
 
  
Compliance with the NAIC Valuatio n of Life Insurance Policies  
Model Regulation with Respect to  Deficiency Reserve Mortality 
 
 
  
 
   
Developed by the 
Task Force on XXX Regulation of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
  
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
December 2000 
Updated for Deviation Language Effective May 1, 2011 
 
(Doc. No. 157) 
 
 
 
 iiT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S 
 
Transmittal Memorandum                  iv  
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 
1.2 Scope 1 
1.3 Cross References 1 1.4 Effective Date 2 
 
Section 2.  Definitions 2 
2.1 Anticipated Mortality 2 2.2 Antiselection 2 2.3 Appointed Actuary 2 2.4  Basic Reserves 2 2.5 Contract Segmentation Method 2 2.6 Credibility 2 2.7 Deficiency Reserves 2 2.8 Full Credibility 2 2.9 Model  Select Mortality Factors 2 
2.10 Policy 2 2.11 Ten-Year Select Factors 2 2.12 X Factor Class 3 2.13 X Factors 3 2.14 1980 CSO Valuation Tables 3 
 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3 
3.1 Regulatory Requirements 3 3.2 Actuarial Opinion 3 3.3 X Factor Requirements 3 3.4 Creation of X Factor Classes 4 3.5 Selection of X Factors 4 
3.5.1 Relevant Company Experience 5 3.5.2 Deriving Anticipated Mortality 5 
3.6 Periodic Assessment of Anticipated Mortality 6 3.7 Adjustments to X Factors 6 3.8.   Basis of Exposure 6 
 
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures 6 
4.1 Required Communications 6 
4.1.1 Opinion 7 4.1.2 Actuarial Report 7 4.1.3 Additional Disclosures 8 
 
 
 iii4.2 Documentation 8 
4.3 Reliance on Data Supplied by Others 9 
 
APPENDIXES  
 
Appendix 1 ⎯  Background and Current Practices 10 
Background 10 Current Practices 10 
 
Appendix 2 ⎯Comments on the Second Exposure Dr aft and Task Force Responses 13 
 
 
 
 
 ivDecember 2000 
 TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons  Interested in the Valuation of Life 
Insurance Policies 
 FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ:   Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 40  
  This booklet contains the fi nal version of ASOP No. 40, Compliance with the NAIC Valuation of 
Life Insurance Policies Model Regulation with  Respect to Deficiency Reserve Mortality . 
  Background
 
 In March 1999, the National Association of Insu rance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted a revised 
version of the Valuation of Life Insurance Policies Mode l Regulation (hereinafter the Model ), 
often referred to as “Regulation XXX.” The  Model  specifies an effective date of January 1, 2000, 
and does not apply to policies i ssued prior to the effective date . Certain types of plans are not 
subject to the Model.  
 The Model  specifies that the 1980 Commissioners’ St andard Ordinary mortality tables 
(hereinafter the 1980 CSO valuation tables) are to be used as the minimum mortality standard for 
basic reserves. The Model  also includes several tables of sele ct factors that may be applied to the 
1980 CSO valuation tables during the fi rst segment, as defined in the Model , for both basic 
reserves and deficiency reserves. In addition, the Model  allows the appointed actuary to apply 
certain percentages (hereinafter X factors) to these select factors to modify the mortality basis for 
deficiency reserves for the first segment. The c hoice of the X factors is subject to certain limiting 
parameters and tests that are specified in the Model . 
 The Model  specifies that if any X fact or for any policy in a company is less than 100%, then the 
standard actuarial opinion and memorandum for the company must  be based on asset adequacy 
analysis, and, in addition, the a ppointed actuary must annually opi ne, for all policies subject to 
the Model , as to whether the mortality rates resulting from application of th e X factors meet the 
requirements of the Model . The Model  provides that this additiona l opinion shall be supported by 
an actuarial report, subject to appropriate actuarial standards of practice promulgated by the 
Actuarial Standards Board.   Critical Issues
 
 A key issue for the appointed actuary is ensuri ng that the X factors comply with the limiting 
parameters and tests specified in the regulation, based on anticip ated mortality during the first 
 
 
 vsegment. This task is complicated by the numbe r of different underwriting classes and plans for 
which X factors may be determined. There is an  additional danger that current X factors would 
need to be increased at some future date, with the possibility of resultant large reserve increases 
and shocks to surplus.  Sources of experience mortality data used as the basis for anticipated mortality are very important, especially for smaller companies and for newer products or mortality classes with no 
significant mortality experi ence upon which to draw. The appointed actuary will need to consider 
how to treat data from different sources. Sect ion 3.5.2 includes guidance as to the hierarchy of 
preference for experience on which to base anti cipated mortality. Data from reinsurers are 
included as an acceptable source of data, among othe rs, if the data are relevant and needed to 
develop a credible basis for anticipated mortality.   The goal of demonstrating confidence in the an ticipated mortality underlying the X factors is 
very important. There are no specific rules to foll ow in the preparation of this demonstration. 
However, approval of X factors by some state regu lators will likely depend on their satisfaction 
with these demonstrations and the implied amo unt of professionalism used in making the X 
factor determinations. The form and content of the supporting actuarial re port can be significant 
to the regulator in consideri ng approval of the X factors. 
 The use of mortality experience net of reinsurance was considered. The task force reached the 
conclusion that a company’s own mortality expe rience on direct plus assumed business should 
be used before any reduction of exposure or cl aims on reinsurance ceded. This conclusion is 
stated in section 3.4.   Exposure Drafts
 
 The first exposure draft of this standard was issued in September 1999 with a comment deadline 
of March 31, 2000. The Task Force on XXX Regulat ion carefully considered the fifteen 
comment letters received. A summary of the s ubstantive issues contained in these comment 
letters and the task force's res ponses are in appendix 2 of the second exposure draft of this 
standard.  The second exposure draft was issued in June  2000 with a comment deadline of October 15, 
2000. Four comment letters were received. Th e Task Force on XXX Regulation carefully 
considered these comment letters and made the following changes to the final ASOP:  
 1. In section 3.4, Creation of X Factor Classes,  the task force split the paragraph dealing 
with reinsurance into two paragraphs to clar ify the guidance with respect to reinsurance 
assumed and reinsurance ceded. On reinsurance assumed, the task force clarified that 
separate X factor classes s hould be considered if anticip ated mortality on assumed 
business is materially different from that on direct business.  
  
 
 
 vi2. In section 3.5.2, Deriving Anticipated Mortalit y, the task force clarif ied that reinsurance 
should be considered in deriving anticipated mortality and that the anticipated mortality 
on reinsured business should exclude the e ffect of experience  refunds or other 
adjustments contained in th e reinsurance agreements.  
 3. In appendix 1, under the section on assessment of anticipated mortal ity, the cautionary 
language associated with the discussion on hypot hesis testing was rewritten and moved to 
the end of the section as ge neral guidance to the appointed actuary in applying any 
approach. 
 For a summary of the substantive issues containe d in these comment letters, please see appendix 
2. The task force and Life Committee thank all those who commented on the first and second exposure drafts. 
 
The ASB voted in December 2000 to adopt this standard. 
  
Task Force on XXX Regulation 
 
John W. Brumbach, Chairperson 
   Andrew F. Bodine   Lew H. Nathan     Robert W. Foster Jr.   Michael Palace    Stephen G. Hildenbrand   Douglas L. Robbins     Robert G. Meilander  
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Lew H. Nathan, Chairperson 
   John W. Brumbach    Godfrey Perrott    Marc A. Cagen   Thomas A. Phillips    Mark J. Freedman   Barry L. Shemin    Stephen G. Hildenbrand  Timothy J. Tongson 
  
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Alan J. Stonewall, Chairperson 
Phillip N. Ben-Zvi   William C. Koenig   
   David G. Hartman   Heidi Rackley    Ken W. Hartwell   James R. Swenson 
  Roland E. King   Robert E. Wilcox
 
 1ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF  PRACTICE NO. 40  
 
 
COMPLIANCE WITH THE NAIC 
VALUATION OF LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES 
MODEL REGULATION WITH RESPECT TO 
DEFICIENCY RESERVE MORTALITY 
 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  
 1.1 Purpose
—The purpose of this actuarial standard  of practice (ASOP) is to provide 
guidance to appointed actuarie s with respect to annual opin ions and supporting actuarial 
reports as to whether certain mortality rates for minimum reserves used to determine deficiency reserves meet the requirements of the National Associ ation of Insurance 
Commissioners (NAIC) Valuation of Life Insurance Policies Model Regulation , as 
amended by the NAIC in Ma rch 1999 (hereinafter the Model ). On plans of life insurance 
elected by the company, the Model  allows the appointed actuary to adjust certain 
mortality rates to reflect anticipated mo rtality, without rec ognition of mortality 
improvement beyond the valuation date, for use in calculating deficiency reserves. This 
standard provides guidance to the appointed actuary in selecting the adjustments to these 
mortality rates and in assessing whether the rates meet the requirements of the Model .  
 1.2 Scope
—This standard applies to appointed actuaries comply ing with the regulatory 
requirements governing the mortality rates us ed for purposes of calculating deficiency 
reserves on certain plans of insuranc e prepared in accordance with the Model.  
  The scope of this standard does not include compliance with state regulations that differ 
materially from the Model  with regard to the issues addr essed in this st andard. Appointed 
actuaries complying with requirements of a re gulation that differs materially from the 
Model  should consider the guidance in this stan dard to the extent that it is appropriate. 
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4. 
 1.3 Cross References
—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the originally referenced document, the appointed actuary should consider the guidance in this st andard to the extent it is applicable and 
appropriate. 
 
 
 21.4 Effective Date —This standard will be effective for all statements of actuarial opinion 
provided for reserves with a valu ation date on or after May 1, 2001.  
  
Section 2.  Definitions
 
 
The terms below are defined for use in th is actuarial standard of practice.  
 
2.1 Anticipated Mortality —The appointed actuary’s assump tion about the mortality to be 
experienced in the future on a group of policies. 
 2.2 Antiselection
—The actions of individuals, acting fo r themselves or for others, who are 
motivated directly or indirectly to take fi nancial advantage of the risk classification 
system. 
 2.3 Appointed Actuary
—Any individual who is appointed or retained in accordance with the 
requirements set forth in the model NAIC Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum 
Regulation . 
 2.4  Basic Reserves
—Reserves calculated in accordance w ith section 5 of the model NAIC 
Standard Valuation Law . 
 2.5 Contract Segmentation Method
—The method of dividing the period from issue to 
mandatory expiration of a policy into successive segments, with the length of each segment being defined as set forth in section 4 of the Model  and using the assumptions as 
set forth in section 4 of the Model . 
 2.6 Credibility
—A measure of the predicti ve value in a given appl ication that the actuary 
attaches to a particular body of data (predictiv e is used here in the statistical sense and not 
in the sense of predicting the future). 
 2.7 Deficiency Reserves
—The excess, if greater than zero, of minimum reserves calculated 
in accordance with section 8 of the model NAIC Standard Valuation Law  over basic 
reserves. 
 2.8 Full Credibility
—The level at which a particular body of data is assigned full predictive 
value based on a selected confidence interval. 
 2.9 Model  Select Mortality Factors
—The select mortality factors in the appendix of the 
Model . 
 2.10 Policy
—Any life insurance pol icy subject to the Model . 
 2.11 Ten-Year Select Factors
—The select factors adopted w ith the 1980 amendments to the 
model NAIC Standard Valuation Law .  
 
 
 32.12 X Factor Class —A group of policies under one or more plans of insurance to which a 
single set of X factors applies. An example of an X factor cl ass could be a male preferred 
nonsmoker underwriting class, having one set of X factors covering all issue ages and 
durations for several plans of insurance. 
 2.13 X Factors
—For durations in the first segment (onl y), as determined under the contract 
segmentation method, the percentage s that may be applied to the Model  select mortality 
factors for the purpose of calculating deficiency  reserves. Subject to the requirements set 
forth in section 5 of the Model , the X factors may vary by policy year, policy form, 
underwriting classification, issue age, or a ny other policy factor expected to affect 
mortality experience. 
 2.14 1980 CSO Valuation Tables
—The Commissioners’ 1980 Sta ndard Ordinary Mortality 
Table without ten-year select factors, incor porated in the 1980 amendments to the model 
NAIC Standard Valuation Law , and variations of the 1980 CSO valuation tables 
approved by the NAIC, such as the smoke r and nonsmoker versi ons approved in 
December 1983. 
  
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices
 
 3.1 Regulatory Requirements
—Section 5 of the Model  contains the requirements governing 
the mortality rates to be used for the pur pose of calculating deficiency reserves. The 
appointed actuary should be familiar with the Model  and any significant  state variations, 
and should be satisfied that applicable actuarial requirements have been met. 
 3.2 Actuarial Opinion
—The Model  contains requirements regarding the selection and 
continued use of X factors to adjust certain mortality rates for purposes of calculating deficiency reserves. If any X factor is less than 100% at an y duration for any policy, the 
appointed actuary should annually prepare an  opinion and supporting actuarial report, as 
required by the  Model  and in accordance with section 4 of this standard. 
 3.3 X Factor Requirements
—The X factors may be used onl y for durations in the first 
segment, as determined by the contract se gmentation method. In determining compliance 
with each requirement, the appointed actuary should take into account only the applicable 
durations in the first segment. Certain requi rements are relatively straightforward; for 
example, no X factor can be less than 20 %. Others call for professional judgment, 
particularly requirements th at involve an assessment of anticipated mortality. 
 
Two requirements contain tests that directly or indirectly compare valuation mortality 
rates, as adjusted by X factors, to a vari ant of anticipated mortality. The appointed 
actuary should demonstrat e that the X factors adopted satisfy these tests. 
 a. Section 5.B(3)(d) of the Model  requires that, for the first segment, the actuarial 
present value of future death benefits calculated using the mortality rates resulting from the application of the X factors be greater than or equa l to the actuarial 
 
 4present value of future death benefits calculated using anticipated mortality 
without recognition of mortality impr ovement beyond the valuation date. The 
actuarial present values shoul d be calculated using the va luation interest rate used 
for basic reserves and the appropriate mortality for each situation. 
b. Section 5.B(3)(e) of the Model  requires that, for the first segment, the mortality 
rates resulting from the a pplication of the X factors be at least as great as 
anticipated mortality, without recogniti on of mortality improvement beyond the 
valuation date, in each of the first five years after the valuation date. 
 
3.4 Creation of X Factor Classes —The appointed actuary should consider the composition 
and characteristics of the polic ies issued under a pl an of insurance in  determining the 
appropriate X factor classes th at will be applicable within that plan. The policies that 
comprise an X factor class generally shoul d have similar underwriting or experience 
characteristics. When X factor classes are si milar across various plans of insurance, these 
X factor classes may be combined in to a common single X factor class.  
 
The appointed actuary should consider the pr esence of reinsurance in creating X factor 
classes. Anticipated mortality should be asse ssed and X factor cla sses should be created 
on a gross basis (i.e., direct business pl us reinsurance assumed, before deducting 
reinsurance ceded). To the extent that antic ipated mortality on reinsurance assumed is 
materially different from that on direct bus iness, the appointed actuary should consider 
creating separate X factor classes.   With respect to reinsurance ceded, the anticip ated mortality on ceded business should not 
be materially different from the anticipated mo rtality of the X factor  class from which the 
business is ceded. If the difference is mate rial, the appointed actuary should consider 
creating separate X factor classes. 
 
When creating X factor classes,  the appointed actuary should be satisfied that mortality 
studies of company experience for each X factor class and for all classes combined are available, to the extent experience exists, or  will be available as experience emerges in 
the future. 
 3.5 Selection of X Factors
—The Model  allows the company to adjust the Model  select 
mortality factors by X factors for the purpose of calcu lating deficiency reserves for 
specified plans of insurance elected by the company. The appointed actuary should select 
the X factors for each X factor class, based on anticipated mortality for each class, without recognition of mortality improvement  beyond the valuation date. As uncertainty 
concerning the level of anticipated mortality increases, the appointed actuary should consider providing a margin for conservati sm, such as by selecting higher X factors. 
 
Anticipated mortality may, for some X factor  classes, exceed the 1980 CSO valuation 
tables with Model  select mortality factor s applied, resulting in X factors greater than 
100%.  In determining anticipated mortality and in selecting X factors, the appointed actuary 
 
 5should be guided by the following considerations: 
  3.5.1 Relevant Company Experience
—The appointed actuary s hould take into account 
the level and trend of actual compa ny mortality experience in assessing 
anticipated mortality for each X factor cl ass. However, in accordance with the 
Model , no recognition should be made of mortality improvement beyond the 
valuation date. 
 
The appointed actuary should use the most  recent relevant company experience 
that is practicably available. Considerati on should be given to the length of the 
observation period, recognizing the tradeoff between having insufficient data if 
the period is too short and having data no l onger relevant if the period is too long. 
The results of the mortality studies s hould be reviewed for reasonableness. 
 3.5.2 Deriving Anticipated Mortality
—If relevant company expe rience for a particular 
X factor class is available and has full credibility, the appointed actuary should 
use that experience as the basis for deriving anticipated mortality. 
 
In situations where relevant company experi ence for a particular X factor class is 
not available or does not have full credib ility, the appointed actuary should derive 
anticipated mortality in a reasonable  and appropriate manner from actual 
experience and past trends in experience of  other similar types of business, either 
in the same company, in other companies (including reinsurance companies), or from other sources, generally in  that order of preference.  
 
If the relevant company experience for a particular X factor class and other 
relevant experience are insufficient to fo rm an assumption, the appointed actuary 
should use professional judgment in asse ssing anticipated mort ality, taking into 
account where, in the spectrum of mortal ity experience, such  business would be 
expected to fall relative to the mortalit y experience for other X factor classes. 
 
The appointed actuary should take into account the effect that lapsation or 
nonrenewal activity has had or would be  expected to have on mortality. The 
appointed actuary should specifically take into account the adverse effect of any 
anticipated or actual increas e in gross premiums on lapsation, and the resultant 
effect on mortality due to antiselection. The appointed actuary should also take 
into account any known positive and negative changes in mortality due to the environment in which the company operate s and the possible net adverse impact 
on mortality associated with those changes. 
 The appointed actuary should consider th e presence of reinsurance in deriving 
anticipated mortality, as noted in section 3.4. The anticipated mortality on reinsured business, both assumed and ceded, should pertain to that on the 
reinsured lives and exclude the effect of experience refunds or other adjustments, 
however characterized in th e reinsurance agreements.  
 
 
 63.6 Periodic Assessment of Anticipated Mortality —The appointed actuary should annually 
review relevant emerging experience for th e purpose of assessing the appropriateness of 
anticipated mortality for each X factor class and, in aggregate, for all X factor classes 
combined. If the appointed actuary chooses to continue to use the prior anticipated 
mortality assumptions, then the appointed actuary should determine whether the prior 
anticipated mortality assumptions are approp riate in light of any relevant emerging 
experience. Statistical analyses may be us eful in making this determination. Other 
quantitative analyses may be  used provided the appointe d actuary can satisfactorily 
support such analyses as being sufficient to  assess the appropriate ness of anticipated 
mortality. 
 
If the results of statistical or other testing indicate that previously anticipated mortality for a given X factor class is inappropriate, then the appointed actuary should set a new 
anticipated mortality assumption for the X factor class.  
 
After analyzing the appropriatene ss of the anticipated mortality  for each X factor class in 
isolation and adjusti ng anticipated mortality as necessa ry, the appointed actuary should 
analyze the appropriateness of the anticipated mortality assumptions at the aggregate level. If analysis at the aggregate level indi cates that aggregate anticipated mortality is 
inadequate, then the appointed actuary should adjust the anticipated mortality assumption 
for one or more X factor classes until the appointed actuary is satisfied that the 
anticipated mortality assumptions are adequate at the aggregate level. 
 3.7 Adjustments to X Factors
—The appointed actuary should use the anticipated mortality 
(without recognition of mortality improveme nt beyond the valuation date) for each X 
factor class, as adjusted for relevant emer ging experience, for the purpose of determining 
whether the X factors for the class meet the requirements of the Model . If any 
requirement of the Model  is not satisfied, the appointed  actuary should adjust the X 
factors for the class to the extent ne cessary to meet such requirement. 
 
The appointed actuary should c onsider the trend in mortalit y when deciding whether to 
adjust X factors, as permitted by the Model . The level and trend of mortality experience 
on similar types of business in other companies, or from other sources, if available, would be an important consideration in making this decision.  
 3.8 Basis of Exposure
—The appointed actuary should anal yze the level and trend of actual 
mortality experience primarily by using e xposures based on amounts or units of 
insurance. These measures are most meaningf ul from the standpoint of financial impact 
on the company. Other measures of exposure, such  as number of lives, can also be useful 
in analyzing experience.  
  
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures
 
 4.1 Required Communications
—The opinion required by section 3.2 applies to all policies on 
specified plans of insurance for which the company has elected to apply Model  select 
 
 7mortality factors for purposes of calculating deficiency reserves. For policies (on such 
specified plans) without X factors applied, the opinion should reflect implied X factors of 
100%.  
  4.1.1 Opinion
—The opinion should indicate, as of  the valuation date, whether the 
mortality rates resulting from the applica tion of the company’s X factors meet the 
requirements of the Model . If the mortality rates do not meet all the requirements, 
a qualified opinion should be rendered, disc losing those requirements that are not 
met.  
  4.1.2 Actuarial Report
—An actuarial report should be prepared in support of the 
opinion. The report should include at least the following items: 
   a. Purpose—The report should indicate its purpose and refer to the specific 
opinion that it supports. 
   b. Specified Plans—The report should identify the specific plans of 
insurance for which the company has elected to apply Model  select 
mortality factors for the purpose of calculating deficiency reserves. The 
report should briefly describe ea ch plan, including its markets and 
underwriting bases, and indicate for each X factor class of business on the plan the amount in force on the valuati on date in terms of policy or rider 
count, face amount, basic reserves, and deficiency reserves. 
   c. X Factor Compliance—The report should describe the process and key 
results which demonstrate that the X f actors for the specified plans of life 
insurance comply with each of the requirements of the Model . The report 
should describe, to the extent ap plicable, each of the following: 
    1. company experience studies, industry experience, and other 
sources of information concerning relevant experience used as a 
basis for determining anticipated mortality, including a summary of the findings and results; 
    2. analyses performed to eval uate the credibility of relevant, 
historical company experience when establishing anticipated 
mortality for each X factor class, including a description of related experience or a statement that professional judgement had been 
used; 
    3. mortality projections made and reflected in anticipated mortality, if 
any, from the period of exposure of  relevant experience studies to 
the valuation date; 
      4. statistical or other quantitativ e analyses performed in assessing the 
continued appropriateness of the anticipated mortality assumption 
 
 8for each X factor class and for all X factor classes in aggregate, in 
light of relevant emerging company experience, and a summary of changes made as a result of the analyses;  
    5. anticipated mortality, w ithout recognition of mortality 
improvement beyond the valuation da te, for each X factor class 
and for all X factor classes in aggregate; 
 
   6. results of the tests of X factors required by the Model , any 
adjustments made to the X factors as a result of these tests, and the effect on deficiency reserves resu lting from any such adjustments; 
and 
    7. any changes made in the appr oach or parameters applied to the 
statistical analyses or tests perf ormed compared to those performed 
at the last annual valuation. 
   d. Schedule of X Factors—The report should include a schedule showing for 
the specified plans of life insurance th e X factors for each X factor class as 
of the valuation date, with an indication as to which X factors are new or have been changed since the last annual valuation. 
  4.1.3 Additional Disclosures
—The actuary should include th e following, as applicable, 
 in the actuarial report or statement of actuarial opinion:  
 
a. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications , section 4.2, if 
any material assumption or method was prescribed by applicable law 
(statutes, regulations, and ot her legally binding authority); 
 
b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance 
on other sources and thereby disclaim s responsibility for any material 
assumption or method selected by a pa rty other than the actuary; and 
 
c. the disclosure in ASOP No. 4 1, section 4.4, if, in the actuary’s 
professional judgment, the actuary has otherwise deviated materially from 
the guidance of this ASOP. 
 4.2 Documentation
—The appointed actuary should crea te records and other appropriate 
documentation supporting the opinion required by section 3.2 and, to the extent practicable, should take reasonable steps to  ensure that this documentation will be 
retained for a reasonable period of time (and no less than the length of time necessary to 
comply with any statutory regulatory, or ot her requirements). The a ppointed actuary need 
not retain the documentation pe rsonally; for example, it may be retained by the appointed 
actuary’s employer. Such documentation sh ould identify the data, assumptions, and 
methods used by the appointed actuary with  sufficient clarity that another actuary 
qualified in the same practice area could ev aluate the reasonableness of the appointed 
 
 9actuary’s work. Unless the actuarial report required by section 4.1.2 reasonably satisfies 
the need for documentation, such documenta tion should also be available to the 
appointed actuary’s employer or client.  
 4.3 Reliance on Data Supplied by Others
—The appointed actuary may rely on data supplied 
by other persons. In doing so, th e appointed actuary should disc lose such reliance in the 
opinion. The accuracy and completeness of data  supplied by others are the responsibility 
of those who supply the data. However, the ap pointed actuary should review the data for 
reasonableness and consistency to the exte nt practicable. For further guidance, the 
appointed actuary is di rected to ASOP No. 23, Data Quality . 
 
 
 10Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 Note:   This appendix is provided fo r informational purposes, but is not part of the standard of 
practice.   
Background
  
 On plans of life insurance el ected by the company, the Nationa l Association of Insurance 
Commissioners (NAIC) Valu ation of Life Insurance Policies Model Regulation ( Model)  allows 
the use of Model  select mortality factors to be applied to the 1980 CSO valuation tables for 
purposes of calculating de ficiency reserves. The Model  select mortality factors do not reflect the 
underwriting classes that have evolved since the period of underlying experience. In light of this 
consideration, the Model  allows the appointed actuary to adjust  the select factor s via X factors to 
reflect anticipated mortality, w ithout recognition of mortality improvement beyond the valuation 
date, taking into account relevant emerging experience. However, the Model  requires the 
appointed actuary to opine annuall y that the adjusted mortality rates meet certain requirements 
set forth in the Model , and that such opinion be supported by an actuarial report, subject to 
appropriate actuarial standard s of practice promulgated by the Actuarial Standards Board. 
  
Current Practices 
 
 Although there is no established current practice for complying with the requirements of the 
Model , there are several current anal ytical procedures that the a ppointed actuary may find useful 
in developing and reviewing anticipated mortality.   Developing Anticipated Mortality
 
 The process of using a company’s relevant experience of the recent past to set an assumption for 
future mortality experience can, when the exposure is large enough, proceed by using the 
average level of the past expe rience, as modified by trend f actors and known changes in the 
environment. But often the exposure may not be  large enough, either because the company is 
small or because a small or newer segment of a large company is the subject of the assumption. 
In such cases, actuaries frequent ly turn to the experience of ot her companies or other segments 
(appropriately modified) to help set the a ssumption. Such procedures are specifically 
recommended for forming mortality assumptions to be used in testing sales illustrations, as 
specified in Actuarial Standa rd of Practice (ASOP) No. 24, Compliance with the NAIC Life 
Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation.  
 
Often the appointed actuary finds it necessary to ble nd the experience from two or more sources 
in order to set the assumption. Sometimes a life act uary will consider the gui dance, to the extent 
 
 11relevant, set forth in ASOP No. 25, Credibility Procedures Applic able to Accident and Health, 
Group Term Life, and Property/Casualty Coverages , even though that standard is not 
specifically applicable to indi vidual life actuarial practice. 
 For some purposes, such as selecting a valuation mortality rate that will stand up in the face of 
moderate future fluctuations in mortality, the ap pointed actuary may wish to select an X factor 
that yields a mortality rate higher than the appointed actuar y’s assumption for anticipated 
mortality, i.e., a level of assumed mortality that  has a reasonably high probability of exceeding 
the actual mortality that may emerge in the future. To accomplish this, the appointed actuary 
needs an understanding of the underlying distribution of potential mortality results. 
 When mortality studies are based on lives or po licies exposed, either the Normal distribution 
(with 35 or more deaths) or th e Poisson distribution (with fewer than 35 deaths) can provide a 
satisfactory approximation of the distributi on of deaths. However, neither of these 
approximations accounts for varying expe rience across different policy sizes. 
 Monte Carlo methods overcome concerns about whether the experience contains a large enough 
data set for the Poisson or Normal approxi mations to be sufficiently accurate, and are 
particularly useful for analyses  that are based on amounts of in surance or units of insurance 
exposed. These methods produce results that co nverge to the underlyi ng distribution given 
enough trials.   Assessment of Anticipated Mortality
 
 There are several methods for analyzing the appropr iateness of anticipated mortality in light of 
emerging company experience.   Hypothesis testing is one useful technique. The appointed actuary should be aware of two types 
of errors associated with hypothesi s testing. A Type I error is the false rejection of a correct null 
hypothesis, while a Type II error is the failure to reject an incorre ct null hypothesis. In terms of 
the Model , the null hypothesis would presumably state that anticipated mortality is consistent 
with emerging experience and woul d only be rejected if statistic ally significant data indicated 
otherwise. In this setting, the Type I error is a company increa sing anticipated mortality when it 
is in fact adequate, while a Type II error is a company failing to increase anticipated mortality 
when it is in fact inadequate. The Type I er ror rate can be controlled by the choice of 
significance level. Type II erro r rates are largely beyond the cont rol of the statistician and 
difficult to assess, but are influenced by the c hoice of significance level, the amount of data 
available, and the magnitude of the differe nce between the assumed and true values.  
 Another approach to analyzing anticipated mortal ity is to treat each review of the mortality 
assumption as if it were the original developmen t of the mortality assumption, making use of the 
now more extensive experience base. For example,  the appointed actuary could use the emerging 
experience, plus any other experience considered  relevant, to set a new assumption, and use that, 
or a higher level based on selecting a high pr obability of adequacy, as the new assumption. 
 
 
 12Credibility procedures are also available. Such procedures may be useful when blending data 
from two or more sources. By extension, credibil ity procedures may be useful for incorporating 
emerging experience into an existing body of experience. 
 This appendix does not provide an  exhaustive list of possible appr oaches to analyzing anticipated 
mortality. Actuarial literature and other sources of information provide specific guidance to the 
appointed actuary on various analyses that may be  useful in analyzing anticipated mortality. The 
appointed actuary should be awar e of the limitations of applying any statistical procedure to a 
body of data. The appointed actuary should use re asonable judgment and consider modifying the 
X factors if the level of emerging mortality expe rience is substantially greater than expected, 
regardless of whether the anticipated mortalit y for the X factor class is deemed acceptable 
through statistical testing. As current practices  evolve, the appointed actuary should consider 
whether the techniques used in prior analyses continue to be appropria te or can be improved. 
 
 
 13Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the Second Exposure Draft and Task Force Responses    
 
The second exposure draft of this actuarial standard of practice wa s issued in June 2000, with a 
comment deadline of October 15, 2000. (Copies of the exposure dr aft and second exposure draft 
are available from the ASB office.) Four comm ent letters were recei ved. The Task Force on 
XXX Regulation of the Life Commi ttee of the ASB carefully consid ered all comments received. 
Summarized below, printed in standard type, are the significant issues and questions contained in 
the comment letters. The task force’s responses  to these issues and questions appear in boldface . 
  Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices
 
 Section 3.4, Creation of X Factor Classes—One commentator found the additional language in 
this section regarding reinsurance to be helpfu l, clear, and provided uniformity of application, 
while another commentator believed fu rther clarification was necessary. The task force added 
clarification with respect to reinsurance. 
 
Section 3.5.2, Deriving Anticipated  Mortality—One commentator be lieved that a reference in 
this section to ASOP No. 25, Credibility Procedures Applicab le to Accident and Health, Group 
Term Life, and Property/Casualty Coverages , would be appropriate. The task force disagreed, 
based on the fact that ASOP No. 25 is not speci fically applicable to life insurance. ASOP 
No. 25 is mentioned in appendix 1. 
 
One commentator felt that clarific ation is needed with respect to experience refunds and other 
adjustments under rein surance agreements. The task force agreed and provided clarification 
at the end of section 3.5.2.   
 
Section 3.6, Periodic Assessment of Anticipated Mortality—One commentator made a general 
comment about the need to apply actuarial judgm ent when evaluating the anticipated mortality 
assumption. Although this is a general statemen t, the task force changed the second 
sentence in the first paragraph to clarify that  the appointed actuary is making a decision 
whether to continue using the existi ng anticipated mortality assumption. 
 
 
Appendix 1.  Background and Current Practices  
 
One commentator noted that cautionary language was part of the discussion of hypothesis testing 
but not used in the discussion of other possible approaches for analyzing anticipated mortality. 
This commentator also mentioned that the appoin ted actuary needs to use professional judgment 
regarding methods and data. The task force agrees with these comments. The cautionary 
language was rewritten and moved from the hy pothesis testing discussion to the last 
paragraph of this appendix. At the same time, the task force made some additional wording 
changes to provide more consistency and reada bility with respect to  the terminology used 
in the appendix.  
 
  
      
 
  
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 19 
 
   
Appraisals of 
Casualty, Health, and Life Insurance Businesses  
 
  
Revised Edition  
 
    
Developed by the 
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 19 of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
June 2005 
Updated for Deviation Language Effective May 1, 2011 
 
  
(Doc. No. 137)

ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 iiT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S 
 
Transmittal Memorandum iv  
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 1.2 Scope 1 1.3 Cross References 1 1.4 Effective Date 1 
 Section 2.  Definitions 2 
2.1 Actuarial Appraisal 2 2.2 Actuarial Appraisal Value 2 2.3 Appraisal 2 2.4 Appraisal Date 2 
2.5 Discount Rate 2 
2.6 Distributable Earnings 2 2.7 Insurance Business 2 2.8 Intended Audience 2 2.9 Other User 3 2.10   Principal 3 
 Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3 
3.1 Introduction 3 3.2 Projected Earnings 3 3.3 Setting Assumptions 3 3.4 Discount Rate 3 3.5 Applicability of Appraisal 4 3.6 Treatment of Assets 4 3.7 Modeling and Model Validation 4 3.8 Sensitivity Testing 4 3.9 Reliance on Data or Other In formation Supplied by Others 4 
3.10   Documentation 4 
 Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 5 
4.1 Appraisal Report 5 4.2 Variation of Results 6 4.3 Appropriate Use of the Term Actuarial Appraisal 6 4.4 No Obligation to Communicate with Other Users 6 
 
APPENDIXES
 
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 iiiAppendix 1 ⎯Background and Current Practices 7 
Background 7 Current Practices 7 
 Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure Draft and Task Force Responses 10 
 
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 ivJune 2005 
 
TO: Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of the Actuarial 
Standards Board, and Other Persons Inte rested in Appraisals of Value of 
Casualty, Health, and Life  Insurance Businesses  
 FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB)  
 SUBJ:  Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 19   
 
 
This booklet contains the final version of the revision of ASOP No. 19, Appraisals of Casualty, 
Health, and Life Insurance Businesses .  
 
 
Background  
 
The ASB originally adopted ASOP No. 19, then titled Actuarial Appraisals , in 1991. The former 
ASOP was prepared by the Actuarial Appraisal Ta sk Force of the Life Committee of the ASB. 
The current task force has prepared this revisi on of ASOP No. 19 to be  consistent with the 
current ASOP format and to reflect current, genera lly accepted actuarial pract ices with respect to 
actuarial appraisals a nd other appraisals.  
 
 
Exposure Draft  
 The exposure draft of this ASOP was issued in June 2004, with a comment deadline of  
November 30, 2004. Thirteen comment letters were r eceived. The task force carefully considered 
all comments received and made clarifying chan ges to the language in some sections. For a 
summary of the substantive issues contained in the exposure draft commen t letters and the task 
force’s responses, please see appendix 2.  The most significant change from the exposure dr aft is that the task force revised section 4.3, 
which deals with the use of the te rm “actuarial appraisal” in refe rence to an appraisal performed 
by an actuary. The revised section 4.3 requires that an actuary not use the term “actuarial 
appraisal” to refer to an appr aisal that does not meet the defi nition of an actuarial appraisal 
contained in the standard. Section 4.3 in the exposure draft requir ed that a report on an appraisal 
that did not meet the definition contain a statement that it was not  an actuarial appraisal.   
 The task force thanks everyone w ho took the time to contribute co mments on the exposure draft. 
 
The ASB voted in June 2005 to adopt this standard.  
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 vTask Force to Revise ASOP No. 19 
 
Charles Carroll, Chairperson 
Cynthia S. Miller    John P. Schreiner John O. Nigh    Joy A. Schwartzman Forrest A. Richen   Barry L. Shemin        
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Robert G. Meilander, Chairperson 
Charles Carroll    Thomas A. Phillips Michael A. Cioffi    Allan W. Ryan Stephen N. Patzman   Barry L. Shemin 
     
Actuarial Standards Board 
   
 Michael A. LaMonica, Chairperson  Cecil D. Bykerk 
  William A. Reimert 
William C. Cutlip Lawrence J. Sher Lew H. Nathan Karen F. Terry Godfrey Perrott William C. Weller 
 
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
1 
ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF  PRACTICE NO. 19 
  
APPRAISALS OF CASUALTY, HEALTH, AND LIFE INSURANCE BUSINESSES 
  
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date
 
 1.1 Purpose
—This actuarial standard of practice (A SOP) provides guidance to actuaries 
when performing professional serv ices with respect to apprai sals of casualty, health, and 
life insurance businesses.  
1.2 Scope
—This standard applies to actuaries when  performing profession al services with 
respect to appraisals of casualty, health, and life insurance businesses, as defined in  
section 2.7.  
 If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4. 
 
1.3 Cross References
⎯When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the original ly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date
—This standard is effectiv e for all appraisals of casualty, health, and life 
insurance businesses initiated on or after November 1, 2005.  
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
2Section 2.  Definitions  
 The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice. 
 
2.1 Actuarial Appraisal
⎯An appraisal of an insurance busin ess presenting a set of actuarial 
appraisal values. A set of actuarial appraisal values is based on a range of discount rates 
or a range of assumption sets  but may in certain circumst ances present a single unique 
value for the business.  
 
2.2 Actuarial Appraisal Value ⎯The present value, calculated as  of the appraisal date, of 
projected distributable earnings of an insu rance business where the distributable earnings 
are based on a set of assumptions.  
 
2.3 Appraisal ⎯An assessment of the value of an insurance business including, but not 
limited to, an actuarial appraisal. 
 
2.4 Appraisal Date ⎯The date as of which an appraisal value is assessed. 
 
2.5 Discount Rate ⎯The rate used to discount projected earnings to determin e a present value 
used in an appraisal.   
 
2.6 Distributable Earnings ⎯Amounts that an insurance busi ness can distribute while 
retaining the level of cap ital required to suppo rt its ongoing operatio ns. Distributable 
earnings consist of earnings of  an insurance business com puted using the applicable 
regulatory accounting basis, adju sted to allow for the inject ion or release of regulatory 
capital and surplus, in recognition of appropr iate capital and surplu s levels needed to 
support ongoing operations. A regulatory accounting basis is the basis required by the insurance supervisory authority in a particular jurisdiction to be used for financial statement filings by insurance companies and similar entities in that jurisdiction.  
 
2.7 Insurance Business
⎯An enterprise involved in assuming insurance risk, such as one or 
any combination of the following: an in surance company or health maintenance 
organization; a collection of po licies or contracts in-force that  cover insurance risk; and a 
distribution system that sells such policies or contracts.  
 
2.8 Intended Audience ⎯The persons to whom an appraisal report is directed and with whom 
the actuary, after discussion with the principa l, intends to communicate. Unless otherwise 
specifically agreed, the principal is always  a member of the intended audience. In 
addition, other persons or or ganizations, such as invest ors or regulators, may be 
designated by the principal, with consent of  the actuary, as members of the intended 
audience. 
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
32.9  Other User ⎯Any user of an appraisal report who is not a prin cipal or member of the 
intended audience. 
 
2.10  Principal ⎯The actuary’s client or employer.  
  
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices
 
 
3.1 Introduction ⎯When preparing appraisals of life, hea lth, or casualty in surance businesses, 
the actuary may use a variety of methods. Often, an  actuarial appraisal, as defined in 
section 2.1, will be prepared. Other methods may also be used that may or may not 
involve actuarial techniques.  
   
3.2 Projected Earnings ⎯When performing an appraisal that is based on discounting 
projected earnings, the actuary should project earnings using a model of future (a) cash 
flows related to such items as premiums, i nvestments, benefit or claim payments, and 
expenses; (b) accrual amounts rela ted to these items; and (c) ot her items such as reserves 
for future policy benefits. The actuary shoul d project cash flows in accordance with 
ASOP No. 7, Analysis of Life, Health, or Prope rty/Casualty Insurer Cash Flows .   
  In the case of an actuarial appraisal, the actuary should project di stributable earnings.   
 
 3.3 Setting Assumptions
⎯When setting assumptions for use in an appraisal, the actuary 
should consider the historical experience of the insurance bus iness, adjusted  to reflect 
known material changes in the environment a nd identifiable trends to the extent such 
information is available. When experience of the business is unavailable or insufficient to 
provide a credible basis on which to develo p assumptions, the actuary should consider 
other information sources in setting assumptions. Other information sources may include the pricing or reserving practices applicable  to the insurance business and the available 
experience of other insurance businesses with comparable policies or contracts, markets, 
and operating environment.  
  In developing assumptions for which the actuary believes additional expertise is needed, 
the actuary should obtain necessary input from persons possessing the relevant 
knowledge or expertise, and should gi ve due weight to their input.  
  When setting assumptions for use in an appraisal, the actuary should take reasonable 
steps to ensure that each set of assump tions used is internally consistent. 
 
3.4 Discount Rate
⎯If the appraisal is based on the di scounted value of projected earnings, 
the actuary should consider displaying apprai sal values using several discount rates.  
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
43.5 Applicability of Appraisal ⎯The intended audiences for appraisals may include parties 
with different interests and perspectives (for  example, management, investors, regulators, 
or sellers). The actuary should consider the legitimate circumstances, needs, and 
strategies of the intended audience, to th e extent these are know n by the actuary, in 
setting assumptions, choosing discount rates,  and choosing what sensitivity tests to 
perform. 
 
3.6 Treatment of Assets ⎯If the appraisal invo lves assumptions about  future returns on 
assets, the actuary should consider the com position of the projecte d asset portfolio in 
terms of type, quality, and maturity. The project ed earnings rate of th e assets should be 
consistent with the valuation of assets (for  example, book or market). The actuary should 
consider the legitimate circumstances, needs,  and strategies of the intended audience, to 
the extent these are known by the actuary, in making an assumption as to investment 
strategy. 
 
3.7 Modeling and Model Validation ⎯When the appraisal is base d on projected earnings, the 
actuary should calculate such earnings us ing a model of the insurance business 
appropriate to the situation. The actuary s hould perform validation tests to determine 
whether the model reasonably reproduces rele vant items of the balance sheet and income 
statements of the insurance business. Wh en the appraisal is based on stochastic 
projections, the actuary should consider whethe r the scenarios used ar e appropriate to the 
situation.  
 
3.8 Sensitivity Testing ⎯When appropriate and practical in the actuary’s judgment, the 
actuary should address the sensitivities of  the appraisal value to changes in key 
assumptions. The actuary should consider the intended purpose and use of the appraisal 
and whether the results reflect a reasonable range of variation in  the key assumptions, 
consistent with that intended purpose a nd use, when determining whether these 
sensitivities have been appropriately addressed. 
 
3.9 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others —When relying on data or 
other information supplied by others, the actuary should refe r to ASOP No. 23, Data 
Quality , for guidance. 
 
3.10 Documentation ⎯The actuary should create records and other appropriate documentation 
supporting an appraisal and, to the extent practicable, should  take reasonable steps to 
ensure that this documentation will be retained for a reasonable period of time consistent with any statutory, regulatory or other requ irements, any confidentiality or nondisclosure 
agreement, and company policy. The actuary need not retain the documentation personally; for example, the actuary’s principal may retain it. Such documentation should 
identify the data, assumptions, and methods used  by the actuary with sufficient detail that 
another actuary qualified in the same practic e area could evaluate the reasonableness of 
the actuary’s work.  
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
5Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures  
 
4.1 Appraisal Report ⎯When issuing communications under th is standard, the actuary should 
refer to ASOP No. 23 and ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications . In addition, when 
preparing a report on an apprai sal, the actuary should disclo se the following items to the 
extent they are relevant to the work performed by the actuary:  
 a. the scope of the assignment, including th e insurance businesses being valued, and 
any limitations as to the availability of data;  
 
b. the actuary’s principal;  c. the duty, if any, that the act uary is assuming with respec t to any user of the report 
other than the actuary’s principal; 
 d.  a description of the in tended use of the report; 
 e.  a description of the corporate organizational stru cture of the business, its 
distribution methods, lines of  business, and products;  
 f. the appraisal date; 
 
g. an appraisal value or range of appraisal values (if a single unique appraisal value 
is presented, an explanation of why this is appropriate); 
 
h. the methodology used to develop the ap praisal, reasons for the choice of 
methodology, and whether a financial proj ection is part of the methodology; 
 
i. the projection model, the accounting basi s used, and other ke y items included in 
the analysis; 
 
j. the results of the model validation;  
 
k. a discussion of the level of capital re flected in the appraisal and the basis on 
which the level was determined; 
 
l. the assumptions, described in sufficient detail that another actuary qualified in the 
same practice area could eval uate their reasonableness; 
  m. the source of any assumption select ed by someone other than the actuary;  
 
n. the extent to which taxes have b een considered and on what basis;  
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
6o. any sensitivity testing results de emed material by the actuary;  
 
p. the source and extent of relian ce on information supplied by others; 
 
q. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.2, if any material assumption or method 
was prescribed by applicable law (statute s, regulations, and other legally binding 
authority); 
 r. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; and 
 s. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, secti on 4.4, if, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has othe rwise deviated materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP. 
 
4.2 Variation of Results
⎯When the actuary issues a report on an appraisal, the report should 
state that actual results can and will vary  from projected results used to calculate 
appraisal values due to deviations of actual from assumed experience. 
 4.3 Appropriate Use of the Term “Actuarial Appraisal”
—The actuary should not refer to an 
appraisal as an actuarial appraisal in any actuarial communication unless the appraisal 
meets the definition of an actua rial appraisal in section 2.1. 
 
4.4 No Obligation to Communicate with Other Users ⎯Nothing in this standard creates an 
obligation for the actuary to communicate w ith any person or persons other than the 
intended audience. 
 
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
7Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 
Note :  This appendix is provided fo r informational purposes, but is not part of the standard of 
practice.   
Background
 
 Actuaries perform appraisals for a number of purposes and for a variety of users, including 
sellers, buyers, management, and regulators. Actuaries perform appr aisals of insurance 
businesses of various types using a variety of methods. In some cases, appraisals performed by 
actuaries show values that are discounted present values of ear nings, distributable earnings, or 
other amounts. In other cases, appraisals performe d by actuaries show values based on “rules of 
thumb” applied to reserve balances, premiums, or other amounts, or on multiples of book value 
or earnings on various accounting bases.   An actuarial appraisal is a specific type of a ppraisal. The key disti nguishing feature of an 
actuarial appraisal is the projecti on of the future stream of distri butable earnings attributable to 
the evaluated business based on the applicable regulatory accounting basi s. This stream of 
earnings includes the runoff of cl aim liabilities and other liabilities carried on the balance sheet 
at the valuation date as projecte d using actuarial assumptions rela ting to items such as mortality, 
persistency, expenses, and investment return. Th e projections may be done  for existing and new 
business separately or in combination. The projec ted earnings are then disc ounted at the selected 
discount rate(s) to derive the actuarial appraisal value.  
  
Current Practices
 
 In performing an appraisal of an insurance bus iness, the actuary has a myriad of bases for 
assumptions from which to choose in developing projections of future earnings and ultimately 
deriving an appraisal value or range of appraisal values for the business. Of course, actual 
experience can and will vary from the assumptions selected. In actual practice, appraisal values 
are sometimes based on extensive analysis of confidential or proprietary information, from 
which thorough testing of key assumptions can be performed. In other instances, actuarial 
appraisals are based on more limited analysis or data because of material ity considerations or 
time limitations, or because internal company data  are unavailable and only publicly available 
information can be used.   Appraisals are commonly performed in connection w ith the sale of an insu rance business. Buyers 
and sellers of insurance businesses often use such appraisals to help them determine the price to 
be paid or received, although th e value of an insurance busin ess resulting from a negotiated 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
8transaction may differ materially from the value or range of values pres ented in an appraisal.  
Appraisals are sometimes used to measure fair values of an insurance business for purposes of 
allocating purchase price in a business combin ation under Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS) No. 141 or in testing impair ment of identifiable in tangible assets or goodwill 
of an insurance business under SFAS No. 142. Appraisa ls can also come into play in calculations 
of embedded values of insurance businesses for purposes of reporting financial results in an 
embedded value framework. It should be noted that in contrast to actuarial appraisal values, the 
embedded value of an insurance business typically does not include future business value.  The discount rate used to discount future earnin gs is a key element of the actuarial appraisal 
analysis and may be an element of other types of  appraisal. This rate impacts both the present 
value of future earnings and the cost of capital. Of ten one discount rate is selected for the entire 
actuarial appraisal. However, because risks va ry by product line and between in-force and new 
business, discount rates sometimes vary similarly, and multiple discount rates may be used in the actuarial appraisal.  
 
Generally, regulatory accounting determines the ear nings available to the owner of an insurance 
business, which is why actuarial appraisals ar e based on regulatory earnings. Future earnings 
based on generally accepted accounting principles  (GAAP) or other accounting bases may also 
be relevant to the value of an  insurance business. However, appraisals of value based on such 
other accounting bases are not c onsidered actuarial appraisals.  
 
The present value of distributable earnings in an  actuarial appraisal is often expressed as (a) 
adjusted net worth; plus (b) existing business va lue; plus (c) future bu siness value; and less  
(d) cost of capital. For certain types of business (for example, most prop erty/casualty business), 
existing and future business components are freque ntly combined into a single component. The 
sum of (a) through (d) is mathema tically equivalent to  the present value of  all distributable 
earnings, inclusive of any initial surplus releases  or infusions at the inception of the earnings 
projection period, and inclusive of the release of the all capital a nd surplus at the conclusion of 
the earnings projection period.  The adjusted net worth component includes regu latory capital and surplus; any regulatory 
liabilities that in essence represent allocations of  surplus (for example, asset valuation reserve, 
regulatory portions of casualty Schedule P rese rves); any regulatory non-admitted assets that 
have realizable value; the diffe rence between market value and book value of assets in support of 
adjusted net worth, and other items impacting value that are not reflected elsewhere (for 
example, reserve shortfalls or surplus notes).   The existing business value component equals the pr esent value of future earnings attributable to 
business inforce on the appraisal date, including any remaining e ffects of coverage previously 
provided, such as the runo ff of claim liabilities. 
 The future business value component equals the pr esent value of future earnings attributable to 
business issued or acquired after the appraisa l date. Under some ci rcumstances, actuarial 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
9appraisal values do not include a future busines s value component. Sometimes it is not practical 
to split earnings between existi ng business and future business, a nd in that case future earnings 
are often projected for the combined  existing and future business.  
 The sum of the above components is often adjusted for the cost of cap ital so that it is equivalent 
to a present value of distributable earnings. The co st of capital reflects the fact that capital and 
surplus needed to be retained in the insurance bu siness are not available as  distributable earnings. 
The cost of retaining capital is  often calculated based upon the di fferential between the after tax 
rate of investment return exp ected to be earned on retained capital and the discount rate. The 
amount of retained capital will depend on the le vel of capital believed necessary for the risks 
inherent in the business and to achieve desired ratings from the various rating agencies. Because 
different users of the actuarial appraisal will have different views on th e appropriate level of 
retained capital, it is often useful to calculate and illustrate the cost of capital separately from the 
first three components of the actuarial appraisal value. 
 In recent years, the use of stoc hastic modeling approach es in performing actua rial appraisals has 
become more common. Stochastic methodology ha s been used for assumptions such as 
investment returns, mortality rates, a nd claim frequency and severity.     
 
 
 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
10Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the Exposure Draft and Task Force Responses 
 
 The exposure draft of this proposed actuar ial standard of pr actice (ASOP), titled Appraisals of 
Casualty, Health, and Life Insurance Businesses , was issued in June 2004, with a comment 
deadline of November 30, 2004. Thirteen comment le tters were received, some of which were 
submitted on behalf of multiple commentators, su ch as by firms or committees. For purposes of 
this appendix, the term “commentator” may refer to more than one person associated with a 
particular comment letter. The Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 19 carefully considered all 
comments received. Summarized belo w are the significant issues a nd questions contained in the 
comment letters and the task force’s responses. Unless otherwise noted, the section numbers and 
titles used below refer to t hose in the exposure draft.  
 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS  
Comment 
 
 
Response  Several commentators questioned the applicability of the standard to property/casualty appraisals. Other 
commentators stated the scope was appropriate.  
 
The task force believed that the scope of the standard was appropriate as written.  In reaching this conclusion, the task force noted that property/casualty appraisals were included in the scope of the existing 
ASOP No. 19, and that at the reques t of the ASB, a property/casualty actuary actively participated in the 
drafting of the standard. In addition, after receivin g these comments, the task force consulted several 
property/casualty actuaries, including the Casualty Practice Council,  and the responses indicated that the 
scope was appropriate. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator questioned why the ASOP wa s assigned to the ASB Life Committee.  
 
The ASB assigns ASOPs that might apply to more th an one practice area, but not necessarily to all 
practice areas, to the operating co mmittee that it deems most appropri ate. The ASB usually bases this 
determination on which committee represents the prac tice area that would be most  affected by the ASOP 
or has the most history with the development or pe riodic review of the ASOP . In this case, the ASB 
assigned ASOP No. 19 to the ASB Life Committee but requested health and property/casualty members be recruited for the task force. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested that “embedded value” be defined in the standard. 
 
The task force added a definition of “embedded value” in appendix 1. 
The task force implemented editorial changes in addition to those addressed specifically below if they enhanced clarity 
and did not alter the intent of the section. 
SECTION 2.  DEFINITIONS 
Section 2.1, Actuarial Appraisal 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that the definition should mention that distributable earnings projections 
should reflect the applicable regulatory accounting basis. 
 The task force believed that section 2.7 (now 2.6) sufficiently covered this concern. 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
11 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator was concerned that the specific definitio n of an actuarial appraisa l in the standard could 
put U.S. actuaries at a disadvantage when asked to perform an appraisal of a non-U.S. entity. 
 
The task force believed that, while this could be the case, it was important to have a clear definition of this term. 
Section 2.7, Distributable Earnings (now 2.6) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator urged that the standard provide guidance as to what is the level of “appropriate capital.” 
 
The approaches to determining the level of required capital continue to evolve, and the appropriate level of 
capital has varied over time with the evolution of re gulatory accounting and will lik ely vary in the future. 
For these reasons, the task force believed that the determination of the appropriate level of capital should not be addressed in the standard. Note, however, that Section 4.1(k) requires disclosure of the level of 
capital and the rationale for that level. 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested that this definition did not correctly describe the recognition of capital flows 
in the determination of distributable earnings.  
The task force agreed and revised the definition to reflect more clearly the r ecognition of capital flows. 
Section 2.8, Insurance Entity (now 2.7, Insurance Business) 
Comment 
  
 
Response Several commentators believed that the term “insurance entity” could be misunderstood to refer to a legal 
entity and that a more descriptive term such as “insurance business” would better convey the intended meaning. 
 
The task force agreed and changed the defined term to “insurance business.” 
SECTION 3.  ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Section 3.1, Introduction 
Comment  
 
 
Response One commentator suggested the second sentence be re vised. The commentator acknowledged that in some 
types of work, particularly certain pr operty/casualty work, it is not typical  that an actuarial appraisal will 
be done. 
 
The task force agreed and changed the word “typically” to “often.” 
Section 3.2, Projected Earnings 
Comment 
 Response Several commentators suggested the definition of projected earnings should be clarified. 
 The task force explicitly included the terms “investme nt earnings” and “claim payments” in the discussion 
of cash flow and accrual amounts to clarify the definition.  
Section 3.4, Discount Rate 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator believed that this section left the impression that an actuarial appraisal should be 
performed based on a single deterministic set of assumptions, as opposed to a stochastic approach. The commentator believed that this was not an accurate reflection of current trends  in actuarial practice. 
 
The task force agreed that stochastic approaches to pe rforming actuarial appraisals are an important part of 
current practice in this ar ea, revised section 3.7 to include review of stochastic scenarios, and added a 
section to appendix 1 that discusses stochastic methods applied to appraisals.  
Section 3.5, Applicability of Appraisal 
Comment 
 Response One commentator suggested that referen ce to sensitivity testing be included. 
 The task force agreed and added wording to this section to address sensitivity testing.  
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
12 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator asked if the actuary should consider the perspective of the entity  initiating the appraisal. 
 
The task force believes that this has been addressed, in  that section 3.5 states th e actuary should consider 
the circumstances, needs, and strategies of  the intended audience for the appraisal. 
Section 3.6, Treatment of Assets 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested deleting the phrase “that support related liabilities” from the first sentence of 
this section since there could also be  assets supporting required surplus. 
 
The task force agreed and deleted the phrase. 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested adding wording to state that projected earnings rates should be consistent 
with a company’s current investment strategy. 
 Although this will often be the case, the task force believes that it may be appropriate at times for an 
appraisal to reflect an investment strategy different from a company’s current strategy and made no 
change.   
Section 3.7, Modeling and Model Validation 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding guidance regarding when an actuary should do stochastic testing. 
 
The task force carefully considered this issue an d noted that any recommendation on when to use 
stochastic testing is likely to be obsolete quite quickly  as this is a rapidly changing area. The task force 
concluded that the choice of appropriate methodology should be left to the professional judgment of the 
actuary given the particular circumstances involved and made no change. 
Section 3.9, Documentation (now 3.10) 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested that the term “actuary’s employer” be changed to “actuary’s principal” as it 
relates to retention of documentation.  
The task force agreed and changed the term to “actuary’s principal.”  
SECTION 4.  COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES 
Section 4.1, Appraisal Report 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator believed the report should include a summary of information provided/reviewed in 
connection with perfor ming the appraisal. 
 
The task force believed that the disclosures called for in sections 4.1, 4.3, and 4.4 sufficiently covered 
what the commentator suggested. 
Section 4.3, Required Disclosure If Not an Actuarial Appraisal (now Appropriate Use of the Term “Actuarial 
Appraisal”) 
Comment 
  
 
Response Several commentators thought that the disclosure required by section 4.3 was inappropriate, that it could 
be confusing to some readers, and that it perhaps coul d lead some actuaries to an  inappropriate application 
of an actuarial appraisal simp ly to avoid the disclosure. 
 
The task force agreed that it was more important to disclose what was done rather than what was not done and revised the language in sections 4.3, 4.1(h), and 4.1(i) to address this concern. 
Comment 
 
Response Two commentators challenged the necessity for this type of disclosure.   
 
The task force believed that only appraisals that meet the definition in this standard should be considered actuarial appraisals. The task force wanted to dis tinguish any appraisal done by an actuary from an 
actuarial appraisal that meets the definition per this standard. 
 The task force revised the requirements of section 4.3 to state that actuarial communications related to an 
appraisal that does not meet the definition of an actuarial appraisal contained in this standard should not 
refer to the appraisal as an actuarial appraisal. 
ASOP No. 19 ⎯June 2005  
 
 
13Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator thought that there might be an in consistency between this section and ASOP No. 41, 
Actuarial Communications , and asked what an actuary calls an  actuarial communication that is an 
appraisal but not an actuarial appr aisal as defined in ASOP No. 19. 
 While acknowledging that this may be somewhat awkward, the task force believed that this problem 
would not prevent the actuary from preparing a suitable communication and disclosure and made no 
change. 
Section 4.7, Deviation from Standard (now 4.6) 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator thought that section 4.7 (now 4.6) was too harsh without proper context as might be 
found in the proposed Introduction to the Actuarial Standards of Practice .  
 The task force revised this section to be consistent with the new wording developed by the ASB in light of 
the adoption of the  Introduction to the Actuarial Standards of Practice . 
APPENDIX (now Appendix 1) 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator thought that since appraisals are often based on a set of stochastic projections, this 
should be acknowledged in the appendix.  
The task force agreed and added language on stochastic projections to the appendix. 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator thought that the discussion of curre nt practices should make  clearer the distinction 
between an appraisal value itself and the items, such as price or fair value, that may be influenced by the 
appraisal value. 
 
The task force believed the existing la nguage was clear and made no change. 
 
 
 
 
  
Actuarial Standard 
of Practice 
No. 37  
 
 
  
Allocation of Policy holder Consideration  
in Mutual Life Insurance Company Demutualizations 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
Developed by the 
Task Force on Allocation of  Policyholder Equity of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
  
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
June 2000 
Updated for Deviation Language Effective May 1, 2011 
 
 
(Doc. No. 154) 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 iiT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S 
 
Transmittal Memorandum                                 iv  
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 1.2 Scope 1 
1.3 Cross References 1 1.4 Effective Date 1 
 Section 2.  Definitions 1 
2.1 Actuarial Contribution 2 2.2 Consideration 2 2.3 Demutualization 2 2.4 Eligibility Date 2 2.5 Eligible Policyholder 2 2.6 Historical Contribution 2 2.7 Membership Rights 2 2.8 Mutual Company 2 2.9 Plan of Conversion 2 2.10 Policy 2 2.11 Voting Rights 2 
 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3 
3.1 Policyholder Eligibility 3 
3.1.1 Components of Consideration 3 3.1.2 Reinsurance 3 
3.2 Basis of Allocation 3 
3.2.1 Basis for Allocating the Fixed Component 4 3.2.2 Amount Allocated as the Fixed Component 4 3.2.3 Basis for Allocating the Variable Component 4 3.2.4 Calculating the Actu arial Contribution 5 
3.2.5 Treatment of Negatives 6 
3.3 Experience Factors 7 
3.3.1 Experience Factors Relate d to Past Experience 7 
3.3.2 Experience Factors Related to Anticipated Future Experience 8 
3.3.3 Other Approaches 9 
3.4 Continuity Issues 9 
 Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures 10 
4.1 Reliance on Data Supplied by Others 10 4.2 Reliance on Asset Cash-Flow Projections Supplied by Others 10 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 iii4.3 Actuarial Report or Statem ent of Actuarial Opinion 10 
4.4 Disclosures 11 
 
APPENDIXES  
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 12 
Background 12 Current Practices 12 
Actuarial Contribution 12 Eligibility 12 Amount Allocated as the Fixed Component 13 Amount Allocated as the Variable Component 13 Legitimacy of Historical Practice 14 Converted Policies, Replacements, and Policy Exchanges 14 Supplemental Contracts a nd Settlement Options 15 
Change in Policy Conditions Due to Update Programs 15 Non-Par Coverages Associated with Terminated Group Contracts 15 Data Problems 15 
 
Appendix 2 ⎯Comments on the Second Exposure Dr aft and Task Force Responses 16 
   
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 ivJune 2000  
 TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Pers ons Interested in the Allocation of 
Policyholder Consideration in Mutual Life  Insurance Company Demutualizations 
 FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 SUBJ:   Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 37 
  This booklet contains the fi nal version of ASOP No. 37, Allocation of Policyholder 
Consideration in Mutual Life Insurance Company Demutualizations . 
  Background
 
 In the past decade, an increasing number of mutu al life insurance companies have converted to 
stock life insurance companies, sometimes including the formation of a mutual holding 
company. Demutualizations present important ac tuarial issues, includi ng the preservation of 
reasonable policyholder dividend expectations, and th e allocation among elig ible policyholders 
of the consideration that may be due them in exchange for their membership rights. 
 This ASOP deals with actuaria l responsibilities with  respect to the allo cation of policyholder 
consideration. Actuaries are often involved in many aspects of such allocation, including 
advising on the actuarial aspects of eligibility of policies for consideration, as well as the 
allocation of consideration to eligible policyholders. 
  Exposure Draft
 
 
The first exposure draft (pub lished in May 1999) received ei ghteen comment letters. These 
comments and the Task Force on Allocation of Po licyholder Equity responses were summarized 
in appendix 2 of the second exposure draft publ ished in December 1999. Eight comment letters 
were received on the second exposure draft. For a summary of the substantiv e issues contained in 
these eight comment letters and the task  force’s responses, please see appendix 2. 
 The key change from the second exposure draf t was additional clarif ication regarding the 
treatment of reinsura nce in calculating th e actuarial contribu tion (section 3.2.4(g)). 
 The Task Force on Allocation of Policyholder Eq uity and the Life Comm ittee thank all those 
who commented on the first and second exposure drafts.   The ASB voted in June 2000 to adopt this final standard. 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 v   Task Force on Allocat ion of Policyholder Equity 
 
Godfrey Perrott, Chairperson 
   Kenneth M. Beck   Dale S. Hagstrom    Charles Carroll   William C. Koenig    Sue Collins    
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Lew H. Nathan, Chairperson 
   John W. Brumbach   Godfrey Perrott    Marc A. Cagen   Thomas A. Phillips    Mark J. Freedman   Barry L. Shemin 
  Stephen G. Hildenbrand  Timothy J. Tongson   
       
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Alan J. Stonewall, Chairperson 
   Phillip N. Ben-Zvi   Roland E. King     Heidi R. Dexter   William C. Koenig    David G. Hartman    James R. Swenson    Ken W. Hartwell   Robert E. Wilcox   
  
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 1ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF  PRACTICE NO. 37 
 
 
ALLOCATION OF POLICYHOLDER 
CONSIDERATION IN MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE 
COMPANY DEMUTUALIZATIONS  
 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  
 1.1 Purpose
—The purpose of this standard is to gi ve actuaries guidance in determining the 
allocation of policyholder consideration when a mutual life insurance company or mutual 
holding company demutualizes, or in reviewi ng, advising on, or opining on the actuarial 
aspects of a proposed allocation; such as pects may include policyholder eligibility. 
 1.2 Scope
—This standard of practice applies to actuaries who ar e determining, reviewing, 
advising on, or opining on the allocation of policyholder  consideration during the 
demutualization of a U.S.-domiciled mutual  company. The standard also applies to 
actuaries performing this work in the demutualization of a non-U.S. mutual company with respect to the U.S. operations of that company in the absence of authoritative guidance in the company’ s country of domicile. 
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4. 
 1.3 Cross References
—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the original ly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 
 1.4 Effective Date —This standard will apply to any act uarial work performed or opinions 
issued on or after December 15, 2000. 
  
Section 2.  Definitions
 
 The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice. 
 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 22.1 Actuarial Contribution —The contribution a particular polic y or class of similar eligible 
policies has made to the company’s statutory su rplus and the asset valuation reserve, plus 
the present value of contributions that the same  policy or class of similar eligible policies 
is expected to make in the future. 
 2.2 Consideration
—The consideration a policyholder re ceives in a demutualization in 
exchange for relinquishing membership  rights (sometimes referred to as  policyholder 
consideration ). 
 2.3 Demutualization
—The conversion of a mutual company to a stock company. 
 2.4 Eligibility Date
—Date (or dates) as of which a policy must be deemed in force, according 
to the plan of conversion, for the policyholder to be eligible to r eceive consideration. 
 2.5 Eligible Policyholder
—The owner of one or more policies eligible to receive 
consideration under the plan of conversion. 
 2.6 Historical Contribution
—The contribution a part icular policy or class of similar eligible 
policies has made to the company’s statutor y surplus and asset valuation reserve in a 
given year. 
 2.7 Membership Rights
—Any rights a member of a mutual company has by virtue of 
ownership of an insurance policy, other than  the contractual insu rance rights under the 
policy. Typical membership rights include vo ting rights and the rights, if any, the 
member has upon liquidation of the company. 
 2.8 Mutual Company
—A mutual life insurance compa ny, or a mutual holding company 
formed in conjunction with the demutualiz ation of a mutual life insurance company. 
 2.9 Plan of Conversion
—The plan under which a mutual  company converts to a stock 
company.  
 2.10 Policy
—Unless otherwise specified, the term policy  (and its plural form, policies ) in this 
standard includes both an insurance polic y and an annuity contract. In some 
demutualizations it may also in clude supplementary contracts. 
 2.11 Voting Rights
—The right to elect memb ers of the board of di rectors of the mutual 
company and the right to vote on an y proposed reorgani zation (including 
demutualization). 
 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 3 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices  
 The actuary may be requested to  determine the allocation of po licyholder consideration, or to 
review, advise on, or opine on the actuarial aspects of policyholder  consideration in a 
demutualization. In doing so, the actu ary should be guided by the following: 
 3.1 Policyholder Eligibility
—Generally, eligible policyhold ers receive consideration in 
exchange for relinquishing membership rights.  The plan of conversion will define which 
policies are eligible (which might includ e policies in subsidiaries under certain 
circumstances). The actuary may be involved in drafting this aspect of the plan of 
conversion. Sections 3.1.1–3.1.2 present issu es the actuary should consider in 
determining, reviewing, advising on, or opi ning on the actuarial aspects of policyholder 
eligibility. 
 
3.1.1 Components of Consideration —Plans of conversion generally express 
consideration as the combination of a fi xed component and a variable component. 
A policyholder may be eligible for a fixe d component, a variable component, or 
both. Although eligibility for the fixed com ponent may be related to eligibility to 
vote in some plans, the fixed component is not necessarily al located in proportion 
to voting power. Although elig ibility for the variable component may be related to 
eligibility for dividends or  for a distribution upon liqui dation in some plans, the 
variable component is gene rally not allocated in propor tion to dividends or to 
what would be paid upon liquidation. 
 
3.1.2 Reinsurance —With regard to how reinsurance affects eligibility, the actuary 
should note, in particular, the following: 
   a. Policies transferred to anothe r company through assumption reinsurance 
prior to the eligibility date generally are not eligible for any consideration 
unless particular facts and circumstan ces indicate otherwise (for example, 
if commitments were made to the polic yholders or to regulators as part of 
the assumption reinsurance transaction). 
 
b. Policies transferred to the demutual izing company from another company 
through assumption reinsurance or as part of a merger prior to the eligibility date generally are eligib le to receive consideration unless 
particular facts and circum stances indicate otherwise. 
   c. Indemnity reinsurance, assumed or ceded, does not affect eligibility. 
 3.2 Basis of Allocation
—The actuary is usually responsible  for determining that eligible 
policyholders are treated appropriately in the al location of consideration. The share of the 
fixed and variable components of consideration that any on e policyholder r eceives should 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 4reflect both equity and practicality. Equity requ ires that actuarial c ontributions of policies 
be adequately recognized. Practicality require s that the proposed allocation take into 
account both administrative feasibility and im perfections in availa ble data. The actuary 
should consider the following sections  concerning the basis of allocation. 
  3.2.1 Basis for Allocating the Fixed Component
—The fixed component of 
consideration should be allo cated on a basis that produ ces a reasonable result in 
view of the specific circumstances of the converting company. Among other 
factors, the actuary may consider the company’s voting policy. This may entail 
the following: a review of the voting provisions contained in the company’s 
bylaws, charter, or domiciliary state’ s law; the way the company has managed 
voting in practice; and the communications that have been made to policyholders. 
These factors usually mean that the fixe d component is allo cated based on each 
eligible policy (regardless of  the size of the policy) or  each eligible policyholder 
(regardless of the number of po licies or size of policies). 
 
3.2.2 Amount Allocated as the Fixed Component —The actuary should ascertain 
whether the amount allocated as the fixe d component has been determined in a 
reasonable manner. The determination of th e amount to be allocated as the fixed 
component is a matter in which judgment  and practical considerations play a 
significant role. The actuary should cons ider whether the total amount to be 
allocated as the variable co mponent (which is determin ed as the total amount of 
consideration less the total amount al located as the fixed component) is 
reasonable in relation to the total actuarial contribution for eligible policies. The 
actuary may also consider the percenta ges of total consideration that were 
distributed as fixed consideration and the specific dollar values of fixed 
consideration allocated to each policy or policyholder in prior demutualizations.  
 
The following approaches to determini ng the fixed component would usually 
produce a result that would be c onsistent with these concepts: 
   a. determining the aggregate dollar value to be allocated as the fixed 
component so that the variable com ponent approximates the value of the 
total actuarial contribution for eligible policies; or  
   b. determining the aggregate dollar value to be allocated as the fixed 
component so that it approximates the value of the total actuarial 
contribution for policies not eligible for consideration, including terminated policies. 
 
3.2.3 Basis for Allocating the Variable Component
—The variable component of 
consideration should be allocated on the basis of the actuarial contribution. For 
this purpose, actuarial cont ributions may be calculate d on an individual policy 
basis or for classes of similar eligible policies. When actuarial contributions are 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 5calculated for classes of similar eligible policies, they should be allocated to 
individual policies within cl asses using parameters that  are reasonably obtainable 
and that tend to drive the primary sources of contribution, such as face amount, reserves, premium, or policy count. 
 
When actuarial contributions are calculated for classes of similar eligible policies, professional actuarial judgment  is required in defining the classes. In this regard, 
the company’s financial management pr actices should be given appropriate 
weight. The actuary should consider the following in deciding whether to group policies into one class: 
   a. Policies that have been priced  and managed together should be grouped 
into one class. For example, it may be appropriate to group all policies 
within a given premium rate, divi dend era, or valuation basis. 
   b. Policies that are priced on a contr act-by-contract basis, such as group 
contracts whose terms are individua lly negotiated between the insurance 
company and the policyholder, should not  be grouped with other policies.  
    3.2.4 Calculating the Actuarial Contribution
—The actuary should design a practical 
methodology for calculating the actuarial contribution that  makes use of available 
historical and current data. In most cases, there will be periods for which 
historical studies or data are no longer av ailable. The actuary will have to use 
approximations for these periods. The actuary should consider what 
approximations will be needed and the effect of such approximations on the 
calculated actuarial contribution in  designing an appr opriate methodology. 
 
The actuary should consider the follo wing in calculating the actuarial 
contribution: 
 
a. Historical Contributions—The actua ry should accumulate the historical 
contributions with the historical af ter-tax investment returns on surplus 
consistent with the way the compan y managed the assets corresponding to 
surplus generated by eac h line of business. 
 
b. Discount Rate—The actuary should calculate the value of future 
contributions using an appropriate di scount rate. The actuary may use the 
net investment income rate on surplu s (net of default cost, investment 
expenses, and taxes), consistent with pr ojections of future contributions to 
surplus, or a risk-adjusted discount ra te appropriate for the line of business 
or type of policy involved. The actua ry should explain in the actuarial 
report or opinion the basis for selecting the rate. 
 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 6  c. Non-Par Lines—The actuary should consider the treatment of earnings on 
non-par lines in the calculation of c ontributions made by par policies. One 
factor to consider is the extent to  which dividends on such par policies 
reflect the earnings on non-par lines. 
   d. Individual Equity—The actuary shou ld be mindful that the objective of the 
calculation of the actuarial contributi on is to address individual equity, 
much like what is done in the determination of premiums and dividends. This means that the actuary should consider techniques such as interpolation within classes of busine ss. It also means that all eligible 
policies should be included. 
     e. Prior Mergers—If the mutual company that is demutualizing is itself the 
result of a prior merger of two (or more) mutual companies, the actuary 
should recognize the pre-merger contri butions by current policyholders to 
the prior merger partners. In decidi ng whether to recognize the relative 
surplus positions of the prior companie s at the time of merger, the actuary 
should consider any relevant provisi ons in the merger agreement, the 
length of time since merger, the amount  and nature of new business since 
merger, and the practice of the compa ny as to commingling the interests of 
policyholders of the predecessor companies. 
   f. Acquisition Price—Where blocks of  business have been  acquired through 
assumption reinsurance, the actuary s hould consider the acquisition cost of 
the block (as a negative contributi on) when determining the actuarial  
contribution. 
   g. Reinsurance—The characteristics of each reinsurance program should be 
considered in light of the purpose of the program and the long-term 
economic impact on a block of busi ness and the company as a whole. 
Reinsurance is usually reflected in  the calculation of the actuarial 
contribution if it is risk reinsurance. However, reinsurance whose primary purpose is surplus relief is usually ignored.  
  3.2.5 Treatment of Negatives
—Actuarial contributions may be positive or negative. 
The actuary should consider the following: 
   a. Where the actuarial contribution for a policy is negative, it is set to zero 
before performing the allocation so that the policy does not receive a variable component of c onsideration. Where the act uarial contribution of 
the policy is calculated in separate pi eces (such as base policy and rider), 
the pieces may be combined algebrai cally and any negative sum set to 
zero, or negatives may be individually set to zero. The company’s 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 7practices as to calculati ng dividends in pieces or in combination should 
guide this choice. 
 
b. Where two or more policies are linked for experience-rating purposes, 
either prospective or retrospective, they are usually linked for allocation purposes. Where one or more of such policies has terminated, the actuary 
should be careful to determine the ac tuarial contribution of the remaining 
policy since cross-subsidies usually will not have been recorded. 
 
c. Where the total actuarial contribution for a line of business is negative 
(before any adjustments described in section 3.2.5(a)), different practices 
have been used. Most prior demutu alizations have left any positive 
actuarial contributions in  that line unchanged (so those policies received a 
variable component of considerati on), but in certain circumstances no 
variable consideration has been give n to any policy in that line. In 
deciding which approach to use,  the actuary should consider the 
company’s financial management of the line and the pooling of risks 
across years. ( Line of business  is used here to reflect the way the company 
has categorized its business for manage ment purposes, as opposed to those 
lines of business shown in the annual statement.) 
 3.3 Experience Factors
—In calculating actuarial contri butions, the actuary may use 
experience factors determined for various clas ses of eligible policies. These experience 
factors fall into two distinct categories:  e xperience factors related to past experience, 
which would be used to calculate historical contributions; and experi ence factors related 
to anticipated future experience, which would be used to calculate prospective 
contributions to surplus. 
 
The actuary should bear in mind the guidance given by ASOP No. 23, Data Quality,  
when performing this work. Establishing the appropriate historical experience may raise 
issues that are not considered in ASOP No . 23. In these cases the actuary should obtain 
appropriate data reasonably avai lable under the circumstances. 
 
3.3.1 Experience Factors Related to Past Experience —In selecting experience factors 
related to past experience,  the actuary should take into account th e company’s 
past practices with respect to determini ng the actual experience that served as the 
basis for dividend allocations, or to de termine other nonguaranteed elements. The 
actuary should review available historical  records of experience studies, actuarial 
analyses, and other reliable information. The historical experience factors should 
represent the actual experien ce of the company, without any implicit or explicit 
margins for conservatism. 
 
  To the extent that reliable company data  or the experience of a policy or block of 
policies are not available, the actuary may have to refer to  indirect sources of data 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 8for guidance in the selection of historical  experience factors. These might include 
historical annual statements, reserve valuation tabulations, contemporaneous 
pricing assumptions, or industry-wide expe rience studies. It is appropriate to 
reflect the pooling of experience data acr oss various classes of  policies (such as 
mortality experience data) in determin ing historical expe rience factors, 
particularly if such pooling was used historically in the dividend allocation 
process. 
 
Generally, expenses, investment income, and federal income tax are allocated 
items rather than items directly charged to lines of business. The actuary should 
understand how the allocation was performed at different times in the past. The 
actuary should generally accept the allocati on to the annual statement line shown 
in the annual statement, a lthough in particular circumst ances there may be reasons 
to modify it. However, the actuary will st ill have to perform allocations within a 
line. The actuary should try to determine how the company previously approached 
allocation and use that approach within a line, unless there is reason to modify it. 
 
3.3.2 Experience Factors Related to Anticipated Future Experience ⎯The 
considerations the actuary should use to  select experience factors related to 
anticipated future experience may differ between policies included in a closed 
block and policies not included in a closed block, as noted below. 
   a. Experience factors for classes of policies included in a closed block should 
be consistent with the assumptions used to calculate the funding of the 
closed block (see ASOP No. 33,  Actuarial Responsibilities with Respect to 
Closed Blocks in Mutual Life Insurance Company Conversions ). Actual 
experience will almost certainly be diffe rent from that assumed in funding 
the closed block.  
 
 To the extent that such differences accrue to the closed block 
policyholders (because of the closed  block mechanism), the funding 
assumptions should be used without ch ange for the actuarial contribution 
assumptions. Examples of these assu mptions include anticipated future 
mortality, morbidity, termination, investment income rates, and policyholder dividends.  
 
To the extent that such differences do not accrue to the closed block policyholders, best-estimate assumptions  should be used for the actuarial 
contribution assumptions. An example is expenses, because actual expenses are often not charged to th e closed block. Income tax is an 
assumption that might fall into e ither category depending on how the 
closed block was constructed. 
 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 9b. For policies not included in a closed block, the actuary should generally 
select experience factors that are best -estimate assumptions for anticipated 
future experience. (For a discussion of the meaning of best-estimate 
assumptions , see ASOP No. 10, Methods and Assumptions for Use in Life 
Insurance Company Financial Statements Prepared in Accordance with 
GAAP .) Where applicable, anticipated future experience should be based 
on recent experience and expected trends in experience  in the company 
that is demutualizing (or in the indus try in general, if the company’s own 
experience is not credible).  
 
For lines of business that exhibit cy clical trends in experience, the 
anticipated future experience should re flect past results over at least one 
complete experience cycle. The cal culation of the value of future 
contributions to surplus should take in to account any material restrictions 
on future profits or margins imposed as  part of the plan  of conversion or 
otherwise. 
 
3.3.3 Other Approaches —In some circumstances, the actuary may calculate the present 
value of historical or future contributions  to surplus directly, using a formula for 
calculating annual or cumulative contribu tions to surplus that reflects the 
company’s approach to assessing risk or profit charges in it s pricing or dividend 
allocation methodology. 
 
Such an approach might be appropriate, for example, in the case of a class of 
large group policies where explicit risk or profit charges have been made at the 
individual contract experien ce fund level. In such ci rcumstances it will not be 
necessary for the actuary to select specific experience factors other than those needed prospectively to pr oject the persistence and gr owth of such charges. 
However, the actuary should consider whet her the company has used credible and 
realistic experience data to reflect the actual cost of claims and expenses in 
determining policyhold er experience funds. 
 3.4 Continuity Issues
—When addressing eligibility and ca lculating actuarial contributions, 
the actuary should take into account the effect  of status changes for any policy that has 
changed status since its original issue date . Some companies effect these changes in 
status by amending a policy, and others by terminating one policy and issuing a new 
policy. Subject to the limits of practicality and the av ailability of data , the actuary should 
consider the following: 
 
a. the current status (for example, par ticipating or nonparticip ating) and the prior 
status; 
 
b. the circumstances of any company-sponsored program allowing or encouraging 
policyholders to change or  replace their policies; 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 10 
c. the issue date of the original policy and the issue date of the new policy, as 
appropriate; 
 d. charges or assumptions specific to the t ype of policy change (for example, term 
conversion costs or provisions for adverse mortality in the case of conversions, as 
appropriate);  
 
e. whether the new policy was issued at mark et price or reflected  gains or losses in 
the old policy; and 
 
f. changes in coverage (for example, cha nges in death benefit, mandated changes to 
individual health policies, or termin ation of part of a group contract). 
  
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures
 
 4.1 Reliance on Data Supplied by Others
—The actuary may rely on data supplied by another. 
In doing so, the actuary should di sclose both the fact and the ex tent of such reliance. The 
accuracy and comprehensiveness of data supplie d by others are the responsibility of those 
who supply the data. However, the actuary shou ld review the data for reasonableness and 
consistency to the extent practicable. For further guidance, the actuary is directed to ASOP No. 23. 
 
4.2 Reliance on Asset Cash-Flow Pr ojections Supplied by Others
—The actuary may rely on 
cash-flow projections or other analyses of  assets supplied by others—for example, 
projections of real estate or equity assets. In doing so, th e actuary should disclose both 
the fact and the extent of such reliance. The accuracy  and soundness of projections 
supplied by others are the res ponsibility of those who supp ly the projections. However, 
the actuary should review the projections for reasonableness and consis tency to the extent 
practicable. 
 4.3 Actuarial Report or Statement of Actuarial Opinion
—An actuary who performs 
professional services subject to  this standard sh ould issue a written actuarial report or 
statement of actuarial opinion to the employe r or client concerni ng the allocation of 
policyholder consideration, unless another ac tuary advising the same entity is issuing 
such a report or statement. This actuarial re port or statement of act uarial opinion should 
express an opinion on the appropriateness of the allocation, and may express an opinion 
concerning the classes of policies deemed eligib le to receive consideration in light of the 
provisions of this standard. 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 11 
4.4  Disclosures —The actuary should include the followi ng, as applicable, in the actuarial 
report or statement of actuarial opinion: 
 
a.  the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications , section 4.2, if any 
material assumption or method was pres cribed by applicable law (statutes, 
regulations, and other lega lly binding authority); 
 
b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; and 
 
c. the disclosure in ASOP  No. 41, section 4.4, if, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has othe rwise deviated materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP. 
  
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 12Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
 Note:   This appendix is provided fo r informational purposes, but is not part of the standard of 
practice.   
Background 
 
 When a mutual life insurance company demutuali zes fully (rather than converting to a mutual 
holding company structure), or when a mutual holding company demutualizes, the value of the 
mutual entity, generally in its entirety and before  any external investment, is distributed in some 
form to the eligible policyholders  or members of that entity. The Society of Actuaries Task Force 
on Conversion of Mutual Life Insurance Compan ies identified the allo cation of policyholder 
consideration as an actu arial matter in its 1987 report, “Report of the Task Force on Mutual Life 
Insurance Company Conversion”  (Society of Actuaries, Transactions  39 (1988):  295–391) 
(hereafter referred to as the Garber Committee Report ). The Garber Committee Report 
considered the determination of the aggregate  amount  of policyholder cons ideration to be a 
nonactuarial matter. A number of U.S. life insurance companies have demutualized fully to date, 
and several more have announced thei r intent to do so. In almost all of these demutualizations, an 
actuary has been responsible for the allocation of policyholder c onsideration and has provided an 
opinion that the allo cation is fair.  
 This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP) reflect s what is considered good practice used in the 
allocation of policyholder consideration up until this time. The unique circumstances and characteristics of each mutual company, however, make it impossible to state with confidence 
that the goal of determining an equitable allocati on can be met in all futu re transactions without 
deviating from this standard in some way as yet unforeseen. The actuary is best qualified, of all 
participating professionals, to assess and anal yze the particular circumstances and operating 
philosophies of the mutual company, as demons trated over its history, in determining what 
actually constitutes adequate r ecognition of a policy’s contribu tion to company value and to 
recommend an allocation with due r ecognition of all pertinent facts. 
  
Current Practices
  
 Actuarial Contribution
—Some early demutualizations calcula ted the actuarial contribution on a 
historical basis only; most recent  demutualizations have used the historical plus prospective basis 
for the actuarial contribution.  Eligibility
—To be eligible to receive any policyholde r consideration, a policy must be in force 
on a specific date (or dates) or be in force within  a specific range of dates.  The date or dates will 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 13be defined in the plan of conversion and may be  influenced by any appl icable state statute. 
Typical examples of eligibility  dates include the following: 
 1. The policy must be in force on the date that the board of directors adopts the plan of 
conversion. 
 2. The policy must be in force on the effective date of conversion. 
 3. The policy must be in force on both the date that the board of directors adopts the plan 
and on the effective date of conversion. 
 4. The policy must be in force on the date that the boa rd of directors adopt s the plan or must 
have been in force on any pr ior date within a fixed peri od (for example, two years). 
 Unless the eligibility date is defined in a manner si milar to that in (4) above, terminated policies 
do not usually qualify as eligible.  Amount Allocated as the Fixed Component
—Virtually all past demutualizations in the U.S. have 
featured an allocation of policyholder equity in  part based on a fixed am ount per policy or per 
policyholder. The fixed or per capita component of  consideration in past demutualizations has 
had values ranging from approximately $25 to over $1,000 per policy or per policyholder. The 
total value of the portion of consideration alloca ted as a fixed component has represented from 
about 10% to about 25% of the to tal value of the cons ideration in these sa me demutualizations. 
The fixed component of consideration has often b een considered to be compensation for the loss 
of the policyholders’ right to vot e for directors and to vote on ot her important matters, such as a 
merger with another mutual company. The Garber Committee Report noted that “these values [i.e., membership values] might reflect some compensation for the cancellation of the less 
tangible attributes of membershi p, the right to vote for directors, and so on.” In mentioning 
compensation for less tangible membership rights , the Garber Committee Report clearly referred 
to the concept of the fixed component. Nevert heless, there has not always been an exact 
proportional relationship between a policyholde r’s voting power and the amount of fixed 
component he or she receives. Mo reover, eligibility for the fixed component may not be directly 
related to eligibility to vote in some plans.  Amount Allocated as the Variable Component
—The variable component  of consideration has 
often been considered to be compensation for pol icyholder rights, other than voting rights, that 
are relinquished in a demutualiza tion. This would include  the right to receive a share of the net 
value of the company in the event of a liquida tion. Probably the most significant right that 
participating policyholders have is the right to receive dividends as declared by the board of 
directors. This right is ge nerally contractual and is not  canceled as the result of a 
demutualization.  
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 14Legitimacy of Historical Practice —The calculation of the actua rial contribution by dividend 
class is often accomplished by calculation of hi storical asset share accumulations. These 
calculations typically have been made for pivotal  issue years and issue ages. Until recently, these 
calculations have not differentiate d between such factors as gende r, smoking status, or premium 
band, on the implicit assumption that the contribu tion principle would tend to equalize profit 
results over time for the various dividend classes.  Generally, an existing dividend class has not 
been split for the purposes of calculating th e actuarial contribution in the context of 
demutualization to recognize factors that have not been recognized hist orically by the company 
in determining dividends.  Even though asset shares calculated to set dividend scales for individual participating business 
normally reflect lapses and other te rminations in all years, the e ffects of past lapses generally 
have been ignored or removed from the calculat ion of actuarial contribu tions for all lines of 
business. This follows from a general feeli ng among practitioners who have worked with 
demutualizations that survivor ship gains and losses from th e past should not accrue to a 
particular policy, but rath er should be spread over all eligible policies. Some other considerations 
that led to deciding not to r ecognize past lapses in such cal culations include the following: 
 1. the unavailability of acc urate and detailed hist orical lapse studies; 
 2. the anomalous pattern of actua rial contributions by issue ag e, issue year, plan, and rate 
book that would result; and 
 3. the precision and uniformity, over time, of class delineations, the lack of which might 
result in significant varia tions between adjacent cells. 
 Converted Policies, Replacements, and Policy Exchanges
—In calculating actua rial contributions, 
actuaries have generally consider ed some or all of the following aspects of converted policies, 
replacements, and exchanges:  1. the nature of the current policy;  2. charges assessed by the company in connect ion with the conversion, replacement, or 
exchange; and 
 3. any differences in experience (for example, mortality or morbidity) that are observed or 
expected as a result of  the conversion, replacement, or policy exchange. 
 If the current policy has been promised divide nds and related treatment accorded an otherwise 
similar policy that did not result from a convers ion, replacement, or ex change, the actuarial 
contribution generally will have reflecte d only (1) above, and not (2) or (3). 
 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 15Supplemental Contracts and Settlement Options —In calculating actuarial contributions, actuaries 
have generally considered the status of the cu rrent policy (participating or nonparticipating) and 
the date the current policy wa s issued. If no new policy was issued when the supplemental 
contract or settlement option was purchase d, actuaries have sometimes considered the 
appropriateness of using a basis th at considers the original policy. 
 Change in Policy Conditions Due to Update Programs
—In calculating actuarial contributions, 
actuaries have generally consid ered the changes to policy co nditions as a result of update 
programs and, where practicable, reflected them, as  appropriate, in the actuarial contribution 
calculations.  Non-Par Coverages Associated w ith Terminated Group Contracts
—In calculating actuarial 
contributions, actuaries have gene rally considered the status of the original group contract, the 
owner of the contract, the company’s approach fo r calculating actuarial contributions for current 
group contracts, and the benefici ary of the actuarial contributi on associated with current group 
contracts. In some cases, actua ries have decided that no ac tuarial contribution should be 
calculated with respect to run-off c overages on terminated group contracts. 
 Data Problems
—Some of the particular  data problems that actuaries have encountered include 
the following:  1. Group annuity policies may have been in fo rce for fifty years or more, but detailed 
records in some cases have not been available back to the issue date of the older policies. 
Actuaries have had to determine some equitable method of estimating actuarial 
contributions for periods before indi vidual policy records were available. 
 2. The problem of unavailable records in some  cases has been extensive with group term 
and health insurance, where it is not necessa ry to keep a long-term history of asset fund 
build-ups. Although group insurance policies will  usually have an experience fund (if the 
policy is dividendable), companies may not ha ve retained the history of this fund for 
more than five to ten years. 
 3. In some cases, the experience studies to support mortality and pricing philosophy have 
been difficult to find. 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 16 Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the Second Exposure Draft  
and Task Force Responses 
 
The second exposure draft of the proposed standard was circulat ed for review in December 1999, 
with a comment deadline of May 1, 2000. Eight lett ers of comment (two from the same person) 
were received. The Task Force on Allocation of  Policyholder Equity carefully reviewed each 
comment letter. Summarized below are the signi ficant issues or questions contained in the 
comment letters, printed in roman type. The task force’s responses appear in boldface.  
  General Comments
 
 One commentator took issue with the statemen t in appendix 1, which was quoted from the 
Garber Committee Report, that the determina tion of the aggregate amount of policyholder 
consideration is a nonactuarial matter. The task force notes that the aggregate amount of 
policyholder consideration in mo st demutualizations has been set by the marketplace. In 
any event, the task force believes that the determination of the aggregate value to be 
distributed to policyholders is be yond the scope of this standard. 
 
One commentator suggested that  the ASB is not qualified to determine whether a method of 
allocation is “fair and equitable.” The task force believes that actuaries are the appropriate 
professionals to form and state an opinion as to whether a plan of conversion is appropriate 
from an actuarial perspective, and the AS B is the proper body to set standards for 
actuaries performing this role. 
 
 Transmittal Memorandum 
 
 One commentator questioned the use of the word  “reasonable” in the context of “reasonable 
dividend expectations.” The task force believes that the term “reasonable dividend 
expectations” is generally well unders tood as defined in ASOP No. 33.  
  
Section 2.  Definitions
 
 Section 2.1, Actuarial Contribution—One co mmentator questioned whether the phrase 
“contribution…to the company’s surplus” should be clarified to indicate th at this is the amount 
remaining in the current surplus account and is, thus, net of all previous  policyholder dividends 
paid or apportioned. The task force agrees that this is  the proper meaning, but did not 
believe that further clar ification was necessary. 
  
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 17 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices  
 
Section 3.1, Policyholder Eligibility ⎯One commentator noted that th e proposed standard did not 
include any discussion of the f act that some policyholders may purchase a policy from a mutual 
company that has announced its intention to demutualize solely or primarily to receive 
consideration. Noting that such activity could have the impact of diluting the value of the 
consideration paid to other pol icyholders, this commentator s uggested that this would be 
inequitable and that the proposed standard might be revised to specify that the actuary should 
consider this in setting the a llocation basis. Specif ically, the commentato r suggested that only 
policies issued prior to the a nnouncement of the company’s intent to demutualize would be 
eligible for a fixed component. The task force recognizes that the question of which 
policyowners are eligible to receive consid eration is frequently addressed in the 
demutualization statutes of the states. Such statutes often specify particular eligibility dates. If policies are in force on these dates, they are eligible to receive consideration. The 
task force notes that policyholde rs receive consideration in ex change for relinquishing their 
membership rights and that newly issued polici es generally have membership rights similar 
to policies that have been in force for longer periods of time. Moreover, as the 
commentator acknowledges, it would not be  appropriate to attempt to classify 
policyholders by their intent in  purchasing their policies, even if it were feasible. The task 
force believed that the standard should not be amended to address the situation pointed out 
by the commentator.   
Section 3.2.3, Basis for Allocat ing the Variable Component ⎯One commentator recommended 
that the proposed standard require the actuary to obtain an opinion of counsel as to whether the 
actuarial contribution method as defined in the pr oposed standard violates  applicable law. In 
particular, this commentator focused on the fact th at the definition of actuarial contribution in the 
proposed standard includes both a hist orical and a prospective component. The task force is 
aware that there has been controversy over the correct interpretation of certain state 
statutes with respect to whether or not it is a ppropriate to take future expected profits into 
account in the allocation of consideration. In cases where such controversy could potentially arise, the task force expects th at the actuary would act with appropriate 
professional discretion to assure that the me thodology used complied with applicable law. 
A number of state statutes are quite clear about the issue, and there is substantial precedent in certain states sanctioning th e methodology set forth in the standard. 
Therefore, the task force does not believe th at a blanket requirement for the actuary to 
obtain opinion of counsel on this issue is n ecessary. Furthermore, the task force notes that 
section 1.2, Scope, provides that “if a conflict exists between this standard and applicable 
law or regulation, compliance with applicab le law or regulation is not considered a 
deviation from this standard.” Thus, the actu ary is not required to apply the methodology 
in section 3.2.3 when, in the actuary’s professi onal judgment, this method conflicts with 
applicable law or regulation.  
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 18Three commentators offered the opinion that the inclusion of a prospec tive component in the 
definition of actuarial contribution per se  violated the contractual rights of mutual company 
policyholders. One of the bases ci ted for this opinion was the belief that mutual insurers operated 
on a basis in which insurance is provided “at cost ” and, therefore, over th eir entire lif e, mutual 
company policies do not make a permanent contribut ion to surplus. If this was the case, the 
actuarial contribution, including bo th prospective and retrospectiv e components, would be zero, 
and thus there would be no basis for the allocation of variable sh ares. These commentators point 
out that if the actuarial contri bution were calculated with refe rence only to the historical 
component, on the other hand, there would pres umably be a non-zero result for the typical 
company with positive surplus. One of these co mmentators expressed the opinion that use of 
both historical and prospective co mponents in the calculation of th e actuarial contribution defeats 
the expectation that the mutual polic yholder will obtain insurance at cost.  
 
The task force believes that the definition of actuarial contribution contained in the 
standard is appropriate. The standard takes no position on whether the “entity capital” 
model, where policies make permanent contribut ions to surplus, or the “revolving fund” 
model, where all contributions to surplus are re turned over a policy’s life, is preferable as a 
philosophy for setting dividends for a mutual company. The task force does note, however, that different opinions on this issue have been expressed in actu arial literature over the 
years. (See, for example, “Some Actuaria l Considerations for Mutual Companies,” TSA, 
XXXI (1979) by Robin B. Leckie.) The rational e for the definition of actuarial contribution 
as including both a historical and a prospective component is not based on adherence to one or the other of these theoretical models. It is predicated, rather, on the concept that the 
allocation of consideration should be based, in part, on the relative economic value of the 
policy to the company. The task force believes th at actuarial contribution, as defined in the 
standard, represents a fair estimate of th is economic value and is preferable to an 
alternative definition that ig nores the value of future expect ed contributions to surplus. 
The task force notes that the definition of actuarial contribution in the standard has 
resulted in positive actuarial contributions ov er a broad range of policies in the several 
actual demutualizations where it has been a pplied. The task force also notes that the 
adoption of such a definition of actuaria l contribution has no impact on a mutual 
company’s dividend-setting practices or pr icing philosophy, either before or after 
demutualization (and thus does not affect the expectation that the mutual policyholder may 
obtain insurance at cost).  
Section 3.2.4(g), Reinsurance ⎯One commentator, while agreeing in  general with the distinction 
between risk and surplus relief reinsurance, note d that the complexity of some agreements will 
require consideration of both their structure and purpose. The task force agreed, and added a 
sentence to that effect.  
 
 
ASOP No. 37—June 2000  
 
 19Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures  
 Section 4.1, Reliance on Data Supplied by Others , and section 4.2, Reliance on Asset Cash-Flow 
Projections Supplied by Others ⎯One commentator opined that the actuary should be required to 
review data and projections of  others, and that the modifyi ng phrase “when pr acticable” in 
sections 4.1 and 4.2 was unduly lenient. The task force notes that practical limitations do 
exist as to what can be reviewed. Nevertheless , the language in both sections was modified 
to make it clear that the actuary should p erform this review “to the extent” practicable. 
  
Prior Commentary and Responses from the First Exposure Draft
 
 One commentator repeated the ea rlier suggestion that there shoul d be a statement of policy or 
policies that will guide the demutualization, similar to that required by ASOP No. 1, The 
Redetermination (or Determination) of Non- Guaranteed Charges and/or Benefits for Life 
Insurance and Annuity Contracts , for redetermination of  nonguaranteed elements. In contrast to 
determination of nonguaranteed elements, th e allocation of policyholder consideration 
occurs at a point in time and does not involve  the ongoing application of consistent policies 
over a period of time. Observers are thus able  to assess the appropriateness of the single 
result of the allocation process without reference to some additional st atement of principles 
put forth by the converting company. In any case, the standard does not prevent a converting company from putting forth such principles. The task  force still does not believe 
that a requirement for a statement of pr inciples of allocation is necessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPEAL OF  
ACTUARIAL STANDARD  
OF PRACTICE  
NO. 14  
 
 
 
WHEN TO DO CASH FLOW TESTING  
FOR LIFE AND HEALTH  
INSURANCE COMPANIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developed by the  
Life Committee of the  
Actuarial Standards Board  
 
 
Repealed by the  
Actuarial Standards Board  
Septe mber 2001  
 
 
Doc. No. 082  
1  
September 2001  
 
TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Governed by the Standards of 
Practice of the Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons 
Interested in Cash Flow Testing for Life and Health Insur ance 
Companies  
 
FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB)  
 
SUBJ:   Repeal of Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 14  
 
 
This booklet notes the repeal of ASOP No. 14, When to Do Cash Flow Testing for 
Life and Health Insurance Companies . 
 
 
Background  
 
To guide actuaries who needed to  perform cash flow testing, the Actuarial Standards 
Board adopted ASOP No. 7, then titled Performing Cash Flow Testing for 
Insurers , in October 1988 (revised July 1991 and September 2001). In addition, in 
July 1990 the ASB adopted ASOP No. 14, When to Do C ash Flow Testing for Life 
and Health Insurance Companies , to provide guidance in determining whether or not 
to do cash flow testing in forming a professional opinion or recommendation.  
 
As part of the project to look at all cash flow testing standards of p ractice, a task force 
of the ASB’s Life Committee reviewed ASOP No. 7 (titled, as of September 2001, 
Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty Insurer Cash Flows ), ASOP No. 14 
(When to do Cash Flow Testing for Life and Health Insurance Companies ), and  
ASOP No. 22 (titled, as of September 2001, Statements of Opinion Based on Asset 
Adequacy Analysis by Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers ). Relevant portions of 
ASOP No. 14 were incorporated within the 2001 revisions of ASOP No. 7 and 
ASOP No. 22.  
 
At its September 2001 meeting, the ASB voted to adopt the revised ASOP No. 7 and 
ASOP No. 22 and to repeal ASOP No. 14.  
 
ASOP No. 14 is repealed for any work performed on or after April 15, 2002.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard 
of Practice  
No. 7 
 
  
Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty  
Insurer Cash Flows 
 
  
Revised Edition 
    
  
Developed by the  
Cash Flow Testing Task Force of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
  
Adopted by the  
Actuarial Standards Board 
June 2002 
Updated for Deviation Language Effective May 1, 2011 
 
 ii(Doc. No. 128)
 iii T A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S  
 
Transmittal Memorandum iv  
 STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
  
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose 1 1.2 Scope 1 1.3 Cross References 2 1.4 Effective Date 2 
 Section 2.  Definitions 2 
2.1 Applicable Law 2 2.2 Asset 2 2.3 Asset Risk 2 2.4 Cash Flow 2 2.5 Cash Flow Analysis 2 2.6 Cash Flow Testing 2 2.7 Derivative Contract 3 2.8 Health Benefit Plan 3 2.9 Insurer 3 2.10 Investment Rate-of-Return Risk 3 2.11 Liability 3 2.12 Notional Asset Portfolio 3 2.13 Other Liability Cash Flows 3 2.14 Policy Cash Flow Risk 3 2.15 Policy Cash Flows 3 2.16 Scenario 3 
 Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 4 
3.1 Analysis of Insurer Cash Flows 4 3.2 Determining the Level of Analysis of Cash Flows 4 
3.2.1 Reasons for Cash Flow Testing 4 3.2.2 Cash Flow Testing is Not Always Necessary 4 3.2.3 Use of Analyses or Data Predating the Analysis Date 5 
3.3 Identification of Assets 5 
3.3.1 Choice of Asset Subsets to Use 5 3.3.2 Notional Asset Portfolios 5 3.3.3 Other Assets 5 
3.4 Projection of Asset Cash Flows 5 
3.4.1 Asset Characteristics 6 3.4.2 Investment Strategy 6 
 
 
 iv3.5 Projection of Policy Cash Flows 7 
3.5.1 Policy Cash Flow Characteristics 7 3.5.2 Management Policy 8 
3.6 Other Liability Cash Flows 8 3.7 Materiality 8 3.8 Reinsurance 8 3.9 Separate Accounts 8 3.10 Modeling and Data 8 
3.10.1 Scenarios 9 3.10.2 Sensitivity Testing 9 3.10.3 Internal Consistency 9 3.10.4 External Requirements 9 3.10.5 Projection Period 10 3.10.6 Limitations of Models, Assumptions, and Data 10 
3.11 Negative Interim Earnings 10 
 Section 4.  Communications and Disclosures 10 
4.1 Reliance on Others for Data, Projections, and Supporting Analysis 10 4.2 Actuarial Report 10 4.3 Documentation 10 4.4 Retention 12 4.5 Disclosures 12 
 
APPENDIXES
 
 
Appendix 1  13 
Background and Current Practices 13 Background 13 Current Practices 13 
 Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure Draft and Task Force Responses 15  Appendix 3—Comments on the Revised Standard as Adopted in September 2001 and ASB 
Responses 19 
       
 
 
 v                 June 2002 
 
TO:  Members of the American Academy of Actuaries and Other Persons Interested in 
the Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty Insurer Cash Flows  
 
FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ:   Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 7  
  This booklet contains the final version of ASOP No. 7. The original title, Performing Cash Flow 
Testing for Insurers , has been changed to Analysis of Life, Health, or Property/Casualty Insurer 
Cash Flows . This standard, along with a revision of ASOP No. 22, now titled Statements of 
Opinion Based on Asset Adequacy Analysis by Actuaries for Life or Health Insurers , supersedes 
ASOP No. 14, When to Do Cash Flow Testing for Life and Health Insurance Companies , which 
has been repealed effective April 15, 2002.    Background
 
 Development of actuarial standards of practice in the cash flow testing area was originally undertaken separately for the life and health and the property and casualty specialties. The first to be published was ASOP No. 7, Concerning Cash Flow Testing for Life and Health Insurance 
Companies . This was developed by the American Academy of Actuaries’ Committee on Life 
Insurance Financial Reporting in conjunction with the Life Committee of the ASB, and was adopted by the ASB in October 1988.  Subsequently, the Casualty Committee of the ASB, through its Valuation Subcommittee, developed a proposed standard titled Cash Flow Testing for Property and Casualty Insurers . 
This draft was presented to the ASB in April 1990. The ASB decided that the document should be revised so that there would be one broad standard that would apply to life and health insurers as well as to property/casualty (P/C) insurers. A Joint Casualty/Life Cash Flow Testing Task Force was appointed by the ASB to accomplish this. The resulting standard was adopted in July 1991.  Further revisions to ASOP No. 7 are now being made for several reasons. First, practice in this area has evolved and this proposed revised standard reflects this evolution. Second, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC) adopted two new model regulations, Synthetic 
Guaranteed Investment Contracts Model Regulation, and Separate Accounts Funding Guaran-
teed Minimum Benefits Under Group Contracts Model Regulation . These two model regulations 
contain language requiring that life insurers submit an actuarial opinion and memorandum 
 
 
 virelated to cash flow testing. Finally, the ASB has adopted a new format for standards, and this 
standard has been rewritten to conform to that new format.  In addition to ASOP No. 7, as part of the project  to look at all cash flow testing standards of 
practice, ASOP No. 14 and ASOP No. 22 were al so reviewed. Relevant portions of ASOP No. 
14 were incorporated within the 2001 revisions of ASOP No. 7 and ASOP No. 22.   At its September 2001 meeting, the ASB voted to adopt the revised ASOP No. 7 and ASOP No. 22 and to repeal ASOP No. 14. In April 2002, the ASB voted to defer the effective date of ASOP No. 7 to July 15, 2002 while it reviewed concerns raised by the Academy’s Casualty Practice Council regarding the standard’s applicability to property/casualty practice. At its June 2002 meeting, the ASB amended the scope to conform to generally accepted casualty actuarial practice. Please see appendix 3 for further information.   Exposure Draft
 
 The exposure draft of this revised standard was issued in September 2000 with a comment deadline of March 31, 2001. The Cash Flow Testing Task Force carefully considered the twenty-one comment letters received. For a summary of the substantive issues contained in these comment letters, please see appendix 2.   The most significant changes from the exposure draft were as follows:   1. In section 3.10.1, Scenarios, and 3.10.3, Internal Consistency, a few changes were made 
for similar reasons to both sections to clarify the actuary’s responsibilities. In 3.10.1(a), the actuary is now required to determine whether the tested scenarios reflect a range of conditions consistent with the purpose of the cash flows, and, if not, the actuary should disclose any material inconsistency in any report or communication. Similarly, in 3.10.3, the actuary is now required to determine whether the actuarial assumptions within each scenario are consistent where appropriate, and, if not, the actuary should disclose any material inconsistency in any report or other communication. 
 2. In section 3.10.2, Sensitivity Testing, a sentence was added noting that the further into 
the future that asset and policy cash flows are projected, the more potential there is for variability in future cash flows. 
 3. In section 4.3, Documentation, wording was added noting that the degree of 
documentation of the actuary’s cash flow analysis will vary with the complexity and purpose of the job. 
 
 
 
 viiThe task force thanks all those who commented on the exposure draft. The task force also thanks 
Susan Witcraft for her assistance in drafting this standard.  The ASB voted in June 2002 to adopt this standard.    
Cash Flow Testing Task Force  
  
Marc A. Cagen, Chairperson 
Michael A. Cioffi   Thomas A. Phillips Owen M. Gleeson   David K. Sandberg David J. Jungk    Herbert S. Wolf Lew H. Nathan  
  
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Godfrey Perrott, Chairperson 
John W. Brumbach (2001)  Robert G. Meilander Marc A. Cagen (2001)   Thomas A. Phillips Charles Carroll    Alan W. Ryan    Michael Cioffi    Barry L. Shemin   
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
William C. Koenig, Chairperson 
   David G. Hartman (2001)  Alan J. Stonewall    Ken W. Hartwell   James R. Swenson (2001)    Roland E. King     Karen F. Terry    Michael A. LaMonica   William C. Weller     Heidi Rackley     Robert E. Wilcox        
  
 
 
 1ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE NO. 7 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF LIFE, HEALTH,  
OR PROPERTY/CASUALTY  
INSURER CASH FLOWS 
   STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
  Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date
 
 1.1 Purpose
—This actuarial standard of practice (A SOP) provides guidance to actuaries who 
perform professional services involving the anal ysis of asset, policy, or other liability cash 
flows for life, health, or property/casualty insurers. 
 1.2 Scope
—This standard applies to actuaries when perf orming the analysis of part or all of an 
insurer’s asset, policy, or other liability cash flows for life or health insurers (including 
health benefit plans). The standard also applie s to actuaries when performing the analysis of 
cash flows involving both invested assets and liabilities for property/casualty insurers. 
  Cash flow analysis subject to this standa rd should be considered in connection with 
professional services such as the following: 
 
a. determination of reserve adequacy;  b. determination of capital adequacy; 
 
c. product development or ratemaking studies; 
 
d. evaluations of investment strategy; 
 
e. financial projections or forecasts; 
 
f. actuarial appraisals; and 
 
g. testing of future charges or benefits that may vary at the discreti on of the insurer (for 
example, policyholder dividend scales a nd other nonguaranteed elements of the 
insurer’s liabilities). 
 This standard does not apply to actuaries when performing cash flow analysis for entities other than life, health, or property/casualty insurers, such as pension plans, retiree group 
 
 
 2benefit plans, or social insurance programs. 
  
If the actuary departs from the guidance set fort h in this standard in order to comply with 
applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, the actuary should refer to section 4. 
 1.3 Cross References
—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the origina lly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date
—This standard of practice is effective for actuarial work performed after 
July 15, 2002.
  
Section 2.  Definitions
 
 The definitions below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice.  2.1 Applicable Law
—Federal, state, and local statutes, re gulations, case law, and other binding 
authority that may govern analysis of insurer cash flows. 
 2.2 Asset
—Any resource that can generate revenue or reduce disbursement cash flows. 
 2.3 Asset Risk
—The risk that the amount or timing of ite ms of cash flow connected with assets 
will differ from expectations or assumptions fo r reasons other than a change in investment 
rates of return. Asset risk includes delaye d collectibility, default, or other financial 
nonperformance. This has been commonly referred to in actuarial literature as the C-1 risk  or 
credit risk . 
 2.4 Cash Flow
—Any receipt, disbursement, or transfer of cash. 
 2.5 Cash Flow Analysis
—Any evaluation of the risks associat ed with the timing or amount of 
cash flows. 
 2.6 Cash Flow Testing
—A form of cash flow analysis i nvolving the projection and comparison 
of the timing and amount of cash flows resulting from economic and other assumptions. 
 
 
 
 32.7 Derivative Contract —Any security that derives its va lue from an underlying financial 
instrument. Examples include interest rate swaps, futures, and options. 
 2.8 Health Benefit Plan
—A contract providing medical, de ntal, vision, disability income, 
accidental death and dismemberment, long-term  care, and similar benefits, whether on a 
reimbursement, indemnity, or service benefit basi s, regardless of the form of the risk-bearing 
organization, including benefit plans provi ded by self-insured plan sponsors.  
 2.9 Insurer
—An entity that accepts the risk of financial losses or, for a specified time period, 
guarantees stated benefits upon the occurrence of specific contingent events, in exchange for 
a monetary consideration. 
 2.10 Investment Rate-of-Return Risk
—The risk that investment rates of return will differ from 
expectations or assumptions, causing a change in the amount or timing of asset, policy, or 
other liability cash flows. This has been commonl y referred to in actuarial literature as the 
C-3 risk  or asset/liability mismatch risk . 
 2.11 Liability
—Any commitment by, or requirement of, an insurer that can reduce revenue or 
generate disbursement cash flows. 
 2.12 Notional Asset Portfolio
—A portfolio of assets, not owned by the insurer, which changes the 
risk characteristics of either the assets or the liabilities of the insurer.  
 2.13 Other Liability Cash Flows
—Cash flows not specifically associ ated with asset or policy cash 
flows. Examples are corporate expenses, paya bles, surplus notes, shareholder dividends, or 
balance sheet items that result from litigation. 
 2.14 Policy Cash Flow Risk
—The risk that the amount or tim ing of cash flows under a policy or 
contract will differ from expectations or assu mptions for reasons other than a change in 
investment rates of return or a change in a sset cash flows. This has been commonly referred 
to in actuarial literature as the C-2 risk .  
 2.15 Policy Cash Flows
—All premiums and other amounts paid by policyholders or contract 
holders to the insurer and all benefits, expens es, and other amounts paid to policyholders or 
others as required by policy or law.  
 2.16 Scenario
—A set of economic and other assumptions used in performing cash flow analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 4Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices  
 3.1 Analysis of Insurer Cash Flows
—The actuary may perform the anal ysis of part or all of an 
insurer’s asset (including off-balance sheet asset), policy, or other liability cash flows. 
 3.2 Determining the Level of Analysis of Cash Flows
—In deciding the level of analysis of 
insurer cash flows, if any, appropriate for the circumstances, the actuary  should consider the 
type of asset, policy, or other liability cash flow s and the severity of risks associated with 
those cash flows. As part of that considera tion, the actuary should consider those risks and 
options embedded in the asset, policy, or other liability cash flows that the actuary judges to 
be material. In addition, the actuary should cons ider the risks that are being undertaken and 
determine what types of deviations from exp ected experience should be taken into account, 
if any, given the purpose of the analysis.  
 3.2.1 Reasons for Cash Flow Testing
—The actuary should consider cash flow testing 
when variations in the underlying risks are likely to have a material impact on the 
expected  
 cash flows in certain products, certain lines of business, or on the company. 
Situations that might indicate a need for cash flow testing include the following: 
   a. where there are material asset risks (for example, below investment grade 
bonds, assets with payment timing risks such as CMOs or mortgage-backed 
securities, mortgages concentrated in cer tain regions of th e country, and large 
illiquid assets such as real estate); 
   b. where there are liabilities that have cash flows far out into the future (for 
example, structured settlement annuitie s with a significant reinvestment  
rate-of-return risk); 
   c. where a company has a new or rapidly growing line of business; and    d. where options have been granted to policyholders or borrowers and the 
likelihood of antiselection in the exercise  of these options is significant (for 
example, an annuity contract holder’s option to surrender th e annuity for cash 
at book value).  
 
3.2.2 Cash Flow Testing is Not Always Necessary
—Insurers are subject to different types 
and degrees of risk. The actuary may decide that the type or degree of risk does not 
warrant cash flow testing. Following are exampl es of situations wh ere other types of 
analyses might be sufficient.  
 
a. If the risks to be analyzed are products with short-term liabilities (for 
example, the vast majority of cash flows occurring within a few years) 
 
 
 5supported by short-term assets, these risks may be more appropriately 
analyzed through other means. The risks may involve a small number of large individual claims over a short-term  period and may be better addressed 
using risk theory techniques.  
 b. If, in the actuary’s judgment, a block of business, taken together with its 
policy term and the associated investment strategy, is relatively insensitive to influences such as changes in economic conditions or interest-rate scenarios, 
the actuary may determine that cash flow testing is not necessary to support the opinion, report, or recommendation, a nd other methods may be sufficient.  
 
c. If the risk being evaluated is unanticipated sources of significant claims 
(examples in the past include AIDS and asbestos), these risks may be analyzed with methods other than cash flow testing. 
 3.2.3 Use of Analyses or Data Predating the Analysis Date
—If appropriate, the actuary 
may use analyses performed prior to the valu ation date, an analysis performed at the 
time of policy issue, modeling based on data  taken from a time that predates the 
analysis date, or other methods. 
  The actuary should document the reasonablen ess of such prior period data, studies, 
analyses, or methods, that key assumptions are still appropriate, and that no material 
events have occurred prior to the valuation date that would invalidate the analysis on 
which the actuary’s opinion is based. 
 3.3 Identification of Assets
—The actuary should identify which assets are included in the cash 
flow analysis. 
 
3.3.1 Choice of Asset Subsets to Use —The same assets should not be improperly used to 
support different blocks of policy cash flows. 
 
3.3.2 Notional Asset Portfolios —If the liability of the insurer is based on the performance 
of a notional asset portfolio, such as in the case of synthetic guaranteed investment 
contracts, the actuary should include the no tional asset portfolio creating this liability 
in this analysis. 
 3.3.3 Other Assets
—The actuary should consider whether policy loans, deferred 
premiums, and other policy-related assets should be included in the cash flow analysis. 
 3.4 Projection of Asset Cash Flows
—In projecting an insurer’s asset cash flows for a given 
scenario, the actuary should consider the assets  of the insurer and the insurer’s investment 
strategy. 
 
 
 6 
3.4.1  Asset Characteristics —The characteristics of an asset affect the timing and amounts 
of its cash flows. The cash flows of some assets are relatively immune to external factors and can be predicted on the basis of asset structure alone (for example, high-quality noncallable bonds). The cash flows of  other assets (for example, callable 
bonds, mortgage-backed securitie s, common stocks, derivative contracts, or premium 
receivables) are more sensitive to external events, and their anal ysis should be based 
on a combination of their structure and exte rnal factors. The actuary should consider 
the following issues in making cash flow projections: 
   a. the sensitivity to economic factors, su ch as interest rates, equity, or other 
market returns, and inflation rates on the insurer’s asset cash flows; 
   b. any limitations on the ability to use asset cash flows to support policy or 
other liability cash flows, such as when a block of assets is specifically held 
in support of a particular block of business by contract or regulation; 
   c. the impact on cash flow associated w ith asset quality as it relates to the risk 
of a delay in asset cash flows being coll ected, asset default, or other financial 
nonperformance; 
   d. the associated costs of maintaining the assets or of converting the assets into 
cash when necessary; 
   e. the historical experience of similar assets, to the extent such experience is 
credible and relevant to the projection of future asset cash flows; and 
   f. other known factors that are likely to have a material effect on asset cash 
flows, particularly those factors that ar e likely to have an effect on asset risk 
or investment rate-of-return risk. 
 
3.4.2 Investment Strategy
—The actuary should consider the following in performing the 
cash flow analysis:  
 
a. the insurer’s strategy regarding the sale of assets prior to maturity; 
 
b. asset segmentation in support of the insurer’s policy cash flows; 
 
c. the insurer’s strategy regarding the sale  of assets with a declining market 
value; 
 d. the insurer’s strategy for the investment of future positive or negative cash 
flows; 
 
 
 7 
e. to the extent the insurer’s investment strategy contemplates borrowing to 
cover negative cash flows, whether the funds borrowed pursuant to the 
strategy are reasonable in relation to the insurer’s existing indebtedness, 
borrowing capacity, and cost of borrowing funds;  
 f. the insurer’s use of derivative contract s, including strategies  to mitigate asset, 
policy, or other liability cash flow risk; 
 
g. to the extent the insurer’s investment strategy contemplates capital 
contributions from a parent  or other source, whether the capital contributions 
can be sustained and are appropriate for the type of analysis; 
 
  h. the costs or gains due to asset,  policy, or other liability cash flows 
denominated in foreign currencies; and      
 
i. any other known factors that are likely to have a material effect on 
investment strategy or the insurer’s ab ility to execute its investment strategy. 
 3.5 Projection of Policy Cash Flows
—In projecting an insurer’s e xpected policy cash flows, the 
actuary should consider the policy’s cash flow ch aracteristics as well as the insurer’s policies 
concerning the management of its policy cash flows. 
 
3.5.1 Policy Cash Flow Characteristics —The characteristics of a policy affect the timing 
and amounts of its cash flows. The actuary should consider the following factors in 
projecting policy cash flows: 
  a. the risk of insolvency or othe r nonperformance by providers of services, 
including reinsurers and other counter-parties; 
  b. the associated costs of maintaining, collecting, or paying out the policy cash 
flows; 
  c. the historical experience of simila r policy cash flows, to the extent such 
experience is credible and relevant to the projection of future cash flows; 
  d. the effect of external factors such as  interest rates, equity or other market 
returns, unemployment rates, and infl ation rates on the insurer’s policy cash 
flows; 
  e. the ability of the policyholder or ot her party to exercise options under the 
policy that have an effect on policy cash flows (for example, put options  
 
 
 8subject to a predefined event occurri ng, or allowing the transfer of funds 
between contracts or funding vehicles);  
  f. the effect of changes in premium (for  example, rate increases) or changes in 
other policy charges (for example, cost of insurance charges in universal life 
contracts); and 
  g. other known factors that are likely to  have a material effect on policy cash 
flows, including off-balance sheet items. 
 
3.5.2 Management Policy
—The actuary should consider management policy concerning 
the settlement or payment of liabilities, and the effect that this management policy may be reasonably expected to have on the projection of policy cash flows. 
Considerations that might affect the proj ection include claim settlement and benefit 
payment practices, expense-control strategies, company philosophy relative to the determination of policyholder dividends, and charges or benefits that vary at the 
discretion of the company, as well as significant relationships between management policy and the scenarios analyzed. 
 
3.6 Other Liability Cash Flows
—The actuary should consider whether other liability cash flows 
should be included in the analysis being conducted. 
 3.7  Materiality
—The actuary may determine that certain  asset, policy, or other liability cash 
flows will not be analyzed if these asset, policy, or other liability cash flows may be 
reasonably expected not to have a material impact on the overall results. The analysis need not be refined if, in the judgment of the actua ry, further refinement would not result in a 
materially different actuarial opinion, report, or recommendation. 
 3.8  Reinsurance
—The actuary should consider whethe r reinsurance receivables will be 
collectible when due, and any terms, conditions , or other aspects that may be reasonably 
expected to have a material impact on the cash flow analysis.  
 3.9 Separate Accounts
—The actuary should consider the effect  of separate account asset, policy, 
or other liability cash flows on the general account. For example, the actuary should consider general account guarantees, recoverability of unamortized expense allowances, and allowable transfers between the separate account and the general account. 
 3.10 Modeling and Data
—The actuary should select an appropriate model for the analysis being 
performed. When the asset, policy, or other liability cash flows being analyzed are represented by sample or hypothetical data, the cash flows used for modeling should be representative of the block of asset, policy, or  other liability cash flows being analyzed and 
should be consistent with the intended purpose and use of the analysis.  
 
 
 
 93.10.1 Scenarios —The scenario is a key element in the analysis of cash flows. Depending 
on the purpose of the analysis, more than one scenario may be used. Scenarios may be generated by either deterministic or stochastic methods. 
  a. Range of Scenarios Cons istent with Purpose of Analysis—The scenario(s) to 
be analyzed may be specified by the clie nt or employer, by applicable law, or 
by the actuary. The actuary should determ ine whether the scenarios analyzed 
reflect a range of conditions consistent  with the purpose of  the analysis of 
cash flows. If not, the actuary should di sclose any material inconsistency in 
any actuarial report prepared pursuan t to section 4.2, or in any other 
communication of the actuary’s findings.  
 
b. Number of Scenarios—Consistent w ith the purpose of the analysis, the 
actuary should consider a sufficient number of scenarios to reasonably 
represent the underlying vari ability of the asset, policy, or other liability cash 
flows.  
 
3.10.2 Sensitivity Testing
—The actuary should consider and appropriately address the 
sensitivity of the model to the effect of va riations in key assumptions. For example, 
the further into the future that asset and policy cash flows are projected, the more potential there is for variability in the fu ture cash flows. In determining whether 
sensitivity has been appropriately addressed, the actuary should consider the intended purpose and use of the analysis a nd whether the results reflect a reasonable 
range of variation in the key assumptions, consistent with that intended purpose and 
use. 
  3.10.3 Internal Consistency
—The actuary should determine the following: 
   a. whether actuarial assumptions with in each of the interest rate and other 
scenarios being analyzed are consistent where appropriate; and 
 
 b. that the actuarial assumptions, methods, or models used for different 
segments of business are materially consistent, and that any significant 
interdependencies are modeled appropriately.  
 
 If not, the actuary should disclose any mate rial inconsistency in any actuarial report 
prepared pursuant to section 4.2 or in any other communication of the actuary’s 
findings. 
 
3.10.4 External Requirements
—The actuary should consider how applicable law, and other 
external requirements relating to such thi ngs as financial statements and operating 
ratios, federal income taxes, insurer capita lization, and distribution of an insurer’s 
earnings to policyholders or shareholders ar e likely to affect future cash flows or 
 
 
 10constrain the range of possible scenarios.  These factors should be appropriately 
reflected in the analysis. 
 
3.10.5 Projection Period —The time period over which cash flows are projected should be 
consistent with the purpose of the analysis . Different blocks of  business may require 
different projection periods. If the objective is to analyze cash flows over the entire life of the block of busine ss, then the actuary should choose a time period over which 
the underlying asset, policy, or other liability cash flows are material. If the objective 
is to analyze cash flows over a period shor ter than the entire life of the block of 
business, then the actuary should disclose the existence of possible material cash 
flows beyond such a time period in analyzing results.  
 
3.10.6 Limitations of Models, Assumptions, and Data
—Cash flow estimates can vary 
considerably as a result of the model use d, the assumptions selected, and the data. 
When results are highly volatile, additional analysis may be appropriate. 
 3.11 Negative Interim Earnings
—The actuary should consider the impact of any negative interim 
earnings during the cash flow projection period, if it is appropriate for the purpose of the 
analysis. 
   Section 4.  Communications and Disclosures
 
 4.1 Reliance on Others for Data, Projections, and Supporting Analysis
—The actuary may rely 
on data, projections, and supporting analysis supplied by others. In doing so, the actuary 
should disclose both the fact and the extent of such reliance. Such disclosure may follow the 
forms prescribed in the applicable NAIC model laws and regulations. The accuracy and comprehensiveness of data, projections, or supporting analysis supplied by others are the 
responsibility of those who supply the data, projections, or supporting analysis. When 
practicable, the actuary should review the da ta, projections, and supporting analysis for 
reasonableness and consistency, and disclose such a review. For further guidance, the 
actuary is directed to ASOP No. 23, Data Quality . 
 4.2 Actuarial Report
—If appropriate, given the purpose for which the cash flow analysis was 
performed, the actuary should issue a written act uarial report as a means of documenting the 
data, assumptions, techniques, and conclusions reached. 
 4.3 Documentation
—The degree of documentation of the act uary’s cash flow analysis will vary 
with the complexity and purpose of the an alysis. The documentation should be more 
complete for more significant assignments such as regulatory cash flow testing than for other 
assignments such as periodic income projections.  
 
 
 11The actuary should document the following, as a ppropriate, for the cash flow analysis being 
conducted:  a. whether any analyses performed prior to th e valuation date were used, and, if so, the 
reasonableness of the prior period data, studies, analyses, or methods; 
 
b. the purpose of the analysis and the risks analyzed;  c. the type of analysis performed (i.e., wh ether cash flow testing or some other method 
of analysis) for each block of business analyzed;  
 d. the results of the analysis;  e. the actuary’s conclusions or recommendations, if any;   
 f. any conclusions or recommendations related to sensitivity testing; and 
 g. the data, assumptions, and methods used w ith sufficient clarity that another actuary 
qualified in the same practice area could eval uate the reasonableness of the actuary’s 
work. The actuary should consider whet her the documentation should contain the 
following: 
 
 1. the asset characteristics;  
2. any limitations on the ability to use a sset cash flows to support policy and 
other liability cash flows; 
  3. the insurer’s investment strategy;  
4. how the policy cash flow characteris tics are reflected in the analysis, 
including the insurer’s policies concerning the management of its policy cash flows;  
 
5. any cash flows not attributable to speci fic asset, policy, or other liability cash 
flows; 
  6. whether any off-balance sheet items were included in the analysis;  
7. relevant cash flows within the scope of the analysis that were specifically 
excluded from the cash flow analysis due to immateriality; 
 
8 the characteristics of any reinsura nce agreements, and how these were 
reflected in the analysis; 
 
 
 12 
9. the effect of separate account asset, policy, or other liability cash flows on 
the general account, such as general account guarantees; 
  10. the model used, including the sources of data and key assumptions;  
11. the scenarios used, and the rationa le supporting the methodology used to 
choose and develop the scenarios; 
  12. how any external factors were included in the analysis;   13. the time period over which cash flows are projected;  
14. the existence of negative interim earnings and its effect on the analysis;  
 
15. whether the actuary relied on asset cash fl ow projections or other analyses of 
assets supplied by others, and the extent of such reliance; and 
 
16. any other data, assumptions, or other methods that are known to materially 
impact the analysis.  
 4.4 Retention
—The actuary, to the extent practicable, s hould take reasonable st eps to ensure that 
the documentation will be retained for a reasonable period of time (and no less than the length of time necessary to comply with any statutory, regulatory, or other requirements). 
The actuary need not retain the documentation personally; for example, it may be retained by 
the actuary’s employer. 
 4.5 Disclosures
—The actuary should include the following, as applicable, in an actuarial 
communication: 
 
a. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications , section 4.2, if any 
material assumption or method was prescribed by applicable law (statutes, regulations, and other legally binding authority); 
 
b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility  for any material assumption or method 
selected by a party other than the actuary; and 
 
c. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, sec tion 4.4, if, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has otherwise deviated  materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP. 
  
 
 
 13Appendix 1  
 
 Background and Current Practices  
 
Note :  This appendix is provided for informational purposes, but is not part of the standard of 
practice.    Background
 
 Actuaries have been performing financial pr ojections for many years. Various cash flow 
elements have often been an integral part of these projections. The large increase in the level and volatility of investment rates of return since the 1970s caused significant swings in asset, policy, or other liability cash flows and present values. The sophistication of insurance products has increased during this time. In addition, fluctuating operating results have led to increased attention to improving the measurement of the financ ial security of insurers. As a result of these 
changes, cash flow analysis has become an increasingly important aspect of actuarial work.    Current Practices
 
 Common approaches to cash flow analysis typically follow these steps:  1. identify which asset, policy, or other liability cash flows are to be included in the cash 
flow analysis; 
 2. select and validate models for asset, policy, or other liability cash flows;  3. select an appropriate scenario or set of scenarios, either deterministic or stochastic;  4. project the selected asset, policy, or other liability cash flows under each selected 
scenario; and 
 5. develop conclusions based on analysis of the cash flow projections.  There are variations on this process. For example, if cash flow analysis is used to analyze the effects of changes in investment strategy, specific assets may not be identified in the initial step of the process. It may be sufficient instead to an alyze variations in asset portfolio characteristics 
such as yield and duration.  Cash flow analysis can be used in a variety of ways, such as analyzing the performance of a particular asset or product under certain specified scenarios or evaluating the solvency of the entire company. A common current use of cash flow analysis is to meet the requirements of the 
 
 
 14NAIC’s Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Regulation  (AOMR ), including any variations to 
this regulation passed by a state in adopting the model. 
 
 
 15Appendix 2  
 
Comments on the Exposure Draft and Task Force Responses 
  
The exposure draft of this revised actuarial st andard of practice was issued in September 2000 
with a comment deadline of March 31, 2001. (Copies of the exposure draft are available from the 
ASB office.) Twenty-one comment letters were r eceived. The Cash Flow Testing Task Force of 
the Life Committee of the ASB carefully considered all comments received. Summarized below are the significant issues and questions contained in the comment letters and the task force’s responses.   
 
SECTION 1.  PURPOSE, SCOPE, CROSS REFERENCES, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
Section 1.2, Scope 
Comment 
   Response A number of commentators asked for clarification whether th e analysis can be for part of an insurer’s asset, 
policy, or other liability cash flows. One commentator did not want the standard to allow testing of only 
assets or liabilities.   The revised ASOP No. 7 allows testing of asset, po licy, or other liability cash flows individually or only 
in part, as appropriate. The task force added wording in section 1.2 to clarify the point.  
Comment 
   Response A few commentators believed that section 1.2 should speci fically mention items that are relevant in today’s 
practice, namely determination of capital adequacy (s uch as the C-3 RBC tests that were required for some 
companies for the first time in 2000) and determination of fair value.   The task force agreed that capital adequacy is relevant  for today’s practice, but believed that fair value is 
not defined well enough, so the task force added only capital adequacy to the list of items. 
Comment   Response A few commentators asked whether ASOP No. 7 was appropriate for property/casualty insurance and 
health benefit plans.   The task force notes that a joint property/casualty a nd life task force originally developed ASOP No. 7, 
which continues to be appropriate for certain prope rty/casualty work and for health benefit plans. 
Comment 
 Response One commentator questioned the relevan ce of ASOP No. 7 for non-U.S. work.  
 Annotation 3-1 of the Code of Professional Conduct re quires the actuary to observe applicable standards 
of practice promulgated by a recognized actuarial orga nization for the jurisdiction in which the actuary 
renders actuarial services. ASOPs promulgated by th e Actuarial Standards Board apply to actuarial 
services rendered in the United States. Actuarial se rvices rendered in a non-U.S. jurisdiction would be 
subject to actuarial standards of practice promul gated by such jurisdiction’s recognized actuarial 
organization, if any. Therefore, the task for ce made no change as a result of this comment.  
SECTION 2.  DEFINITIONS 
Section 2.2, Asset, and 2.11, Liability  
Comment 
 Response Many commentators offered suggestions for changing these definitions.  
 The task force believes the definitions are appropriate . The definitions are consistent with those found in 
other standards, where practical. The definitions in  ASOP No. 7 are for just this standard and are 
appropriate for this standard. 
 
 
 16Section 2.5, Cash Flow Analysis , and 2.6, Cash Flow Testing 
Comment 
 Response One commentator did not like the distinctions made be tween “cash flow analysis” and “cash flow testing.” 
 The task force believes the definitions are appropria te, since ASOP No. 7 is now designed to make a 
hierarchy of types of analysis, w ith “cash flow analysis” being the most general term, and “cash flow 
testing” being one type of cash flow analysis.  
Section 2.12, Notional Asset Portfolio 
Comment  Response A number of commentators suggested changes to this definition.  
 The task force revised the definition in response. 
Section 2.13, Other Liability Cash Flows 
Comment    Response One commentator noted that the term “other liability cash flows” was used, but not defined, in the exposure 
draft of ASOP No. 22. A commentator on ASOP No. 22 thought that the definition should include surplus 
notes.   The task force agreed and added a definition of “o ther liability cash flows,” which includes a reference 
to surplus notes, to both ASOP No. 7 and No. 22.  
Section 2.15, Policy Cash Flows (previously section 2.14) 
Comment   Response One commentator noted that the definition did not treat  premium taxes properly, as premium taxes are not 
paid on behalf of policyholders, but rather are paid as required by law.   The task force agreed with this comment and changed the definition accordingly.  
SECTION 3.  ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Section 3.2.1, Reasons for Cash Flow Testing, and 3.2.2, Cash Flow Testing is Not Always Necessary 
Comment 
  Response A few commentators questioned the use of the phrases  “long duration” and “short-term,” and noted that 
these can have meaning in a GAAP context.   The task force agreed that the use of those phrases could cause confusion in that regard and changed the 
wording. 
Section 3.2.2, Cash Flow Testing is Not Always Necessary 
Comment   Response One commentator asked that the phrase “policy term” be included as part of what the actuary should 
consider as to whether a block is relatively insensitive to changes in economic conditions.  
 The task force agreed and added words to accomplish this.  
Section 3.2.3, Use of Analyses or Data Predating the Analysis Date 
Comment 
 Response One commentator believed that the actuary should cons ider future material events in the analysis.  
 The task force disagreed, believing such a thi ng is beyond the scope of cash flow analysis.  
Section 3.5.1, Policy Cash Flow Characteristics 
Comment 
 Response One commentator asked that the issue of changes in the premium scales be included explicitly.  
 The task force added section 3.5.1(f), which speci fically identifies changes in premiums and other 
charges as items for the actuary to consider. 
Section 3.7, Materiality 
Comment   Response A few commentators wanted further guidance on ma teriality. Several asked that materiality be 
mentioned in specific sections.   The task force believes that more detailed guidance on materiality is beyond the scope of this standard. 
The task force notes that the guidance in section 3.7 is  applicable to the entire standard, so it did not add 
specific mentions in other sections. 
 
 
 17Section 3.8, Reinsurance 
Comment 
 Response One commentator asked whether section 3.8 differed from section 3.5.1(a).  
 Section 3.5.1(a) specifically deals with policy cash flow s, while section 3.8 is broader than that. The task 
force made no changes to either section.  
Section 3.9, Separate Accounts 
Comment   Response A few commentators wanted more detailed guidance on treatment of flows between the general account and 
the separate account.   The task force believes that the level of guidance in this section is appropriate. However, the task force 
agreed with a comment that the actuary should consider whether certain cash flows between the general and separate accounts were allowable, and changed the wording accordingly. 
Section 3.10.1, Scenarios 
Comment   Response A number of commentators questioned the use of the word “often” in the sentence, “Often, more than one 
scenario will be analyzed.”   The task force removed the word “often” and substituted the words “depending on the purpose of the analysis.” 
Comment    Response Regarding 3.10.1(b), Number of Scenarios, one commentator wanted more detailed guidance on the number 
of scenarios. Another commentator wanted words that  put less emphasis on the investment rate of return 
being the key item of interaction with asse t, policy, or other liability cash flows.  
 The task force believes that the level of guidance on th e number of scenarios is appropriate. The task force 
did change this section to put less emphasis, when choosing the number of scenarios, on whether asset, 
policy, or other liability cash flows vary with investment rates of return.  
Section 3.10.2, Sensitivity Testing 
Comment   Response A few commentators noted the issue of cash flows being more uncertain the further into the future a 
projection is done.   The task force agreed and added words to section 3.10. 2, noting more potential for variability the further into 
the future the cash flows are projected. 
Section 3.11, Negative Interim Earnings 
Comment   Response One commentator mentioned that negative interim earnings  were an accounting issue and that, therefore, this 
section should be eliminated.   The task force disagreed. This section emphasizes the point that, if appropriate for the purposes of the 
analysis (for example, an asset adequacy test), th e actuary should consider whether negative earnings in 
some years (the typical concern being the early projec tion years) affect whether future positive earnings in 
other (typically, later projection) years can be realized ; i.e., the block tested may require the infusion of 
additional funds before the positive earnings years start. Th e task force agreed that in some types of analyses 
(for example, pricing and analyzing a new block of business where the company has significant surplus) the consideration of negative earnings may not be appropriate.  
 
 
 18 
SECTION 4.  COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES 
Section 4.1, Reliance on Others for Da ta, Projections, and Supporting Analysis 
Comment 
   Response One commentator noted that wherever the term “data” was mentioned in terms of an actuary reviewing and 
using the work of others, it was more appropriate to use the more comprehensive terminology “data, 
projections, or supporting analysis.”   The task force agreed and made the recommended change. 
Section 4.3, Documentation 
Comment   Response Some commentators believed that section 4.3 should be more general and not contain a list of items needing 
documenting, while others liked the guidance a list gave.   The task force agreed to keep the list, but shor tened the descriptions of some of the items.  
Comment 
 Response A few commentators noted that the amount of disclosure  should vary based on the complexity of the project. 
 The task force agreed and added wording to note this. 
Comment   Response One commentator noted that a disclosure item should be added for analyses performed prior to the valuation 
date.   The task force agreed and added what is now section 4.3(g).  
Comment   Response One commentator noted that section 4.3(g)(15) (pre viously section 4.3(u)) on documentation of negative 
interim earnings should be modified to note that this should be done only if appropriate for the analysis.  
 The task force believes this issue is covered by other wording in section 4.3, which notes that documentation 
should be appropriate for the analysis being done.  
Section 4.4, Retention 
Comment  Response One commentator noted that there should be a section on document retention.  
 The task force agreed and added a new section 4.4, Retention. 
 
 
 
 19Appendix 3 
 
Comments on the Revised Standard as Adopted  
in September 2001 and ASB Responses 
  
As appendix 2 indicates, the exposure draft of th is revised actuarial standard of practice was 
issued in September 2000 with a comment deadline of March 31, 2001. The Cash Flow Testing Task Force of the Life Operating Committee of  the ASB, after carefully considering all 
comments received, presented a proposed final revised standard to the ASB for adoption. At its September 2001 meeting, the ASB adopted the revised standard (with minor edits) with an effective date of April 15, 2002.   In March of 2002, representatives of the Casualty  Practice Council of the American Academy of 
Actuaries identified concerns regarding the application of the revised standard to property and casualty practice. Specifically, they expressed concern that the scope of the revised standard went beyond generally accepted actuarial practice in the property and casualty area and, arguably, called for casualty actuaries to consider cash flow testing in settings where they typically would not do so and where, in their view, cash flow testing would not be needed.  
 In light of these concerns, the Casualty Practice Council formally requested that the ASB defer the effective date of the revised standard to July 15, 2002, in order to provide the Council with 
an opportunity to present its concerns and offer one or more suggested remedies. The ASB carefully considered the Casualty Practice Council’s request and agreed to defer the effective date of the revised standard to July 15, 2002.   Representatives of the Casualty Practice Council attended the ASB’s June 2002 meeting and presented the Council’s concerns. The chairperson of the Life Operating Committee of the ASB was also present. After considerable discussion and consideration, the ASB agreed that it would be appropriate to do the following:  1. amend the scope of the revised standard to conform more closely to current, generally 
accepted practice among property and casualty actuaries; 
 2. proceed with such amended scope without re-exposure to the membership since the scope 
and content of the revised standard (as adopted at the September 2001 meeting) with respect to life and health practice remained unaltered; and 
 3. inform the membership and all interested parties of these developments and the effective 
date of July 15, 2002.  
 The Casualty Practice Council representatives also opined that section 3.2, Determining the Level of Analysis of Cash Flows, in requiring the actuary to consider “all material risks and 
 
 
 20options embedded in the asset, policy or other liability cash flows,” was unclear as to what is or 
is not “material.” The ASB agreed a clarification was appropriate for all practice areas, and modified the section to require the actuary to consider only those risks and options that the actuary believes to be material.  
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 11 
 
 
 
 
Treatment of Reinsurance or Similar Risk Transfer Programs 
Involving Life Insurance, Annuities, or Health Benefit Plans  
in Financial Reports  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developed by the 
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 11 of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
April 2021 
 
Doc. No. 199 
 

ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 iiTABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Transmittal Memorandum iv 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1  
1.1 Purpose 1  
1.2 Scope 1  
1.3 Cross References 2  
1.4 Effective Date 2  
 
Section 2. Definitions 2  
2.1 Assuming Entity 2  
2.2 Ceding Entity 2  
2.3 Collectability of Reinsurance Proceeds 2  
2.4 Counterparty 2  
2.5 Counterparty Risk 2  
2.6 Financial Report 2  
2.7 Health Benefit Plan 2  
2.8 Model 3  
2.9 Net Liabilities 3  
2.10 Net Retained Business 3  
2.11 Nonguaranteed Reinsurance Elements 3  
2.12 Nonproportional Feature 3  
2.13 Reinsurance Agreement 3  
2.14 Reinsurance Assumed 3  
2.15 Reinsurance Ceded 3  
2.16 Reinsurance Program 3  
2.17 Service Provider 4  
 
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 4  
3.1 Reinsurance Program Features 4  
3.2 Impact of Risks Reinsured 4  
3.3 Impact of Risks Retained 5  
3.4 Models Used in Preparing Financial Reports 7  
3.5 Assessing and Analyzing the Impact of Counterparty Risk 7  
3.6 Assessing and Analyzing the Risks Being Transferred in a Reinsurance Program 8  
3.7 Treatment of Reinsurance Risks 8  
3.7.1 Treatment of Reinsurance Ceded 9  
3.7.2 Treatment of Reinsurance Assumed 9  
3.8 Risk of Termination of Reinsurance Programs 9  
3.9 Additional Liabilities, Reserves, or Allocation of Capital 10  
3.10 Accounting Guidance 11  
3.11 Experience Analysis 11  
3.12 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others 11  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 iii 3.13 Reliance on Assumptions or Methods Selected by Another Party 11  
3.14 Reliance on Models Developed by Others 11  
3.15 Reliance on Another Actuary 11  
3.16 Reliance on Expertise of Others 12  
3.17  Documentation 12  
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 12  
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 12  
4.2 Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 14  
 
APPENDIXES 
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 15  
Background 15  
Current Practices 18  
 
Appendix 2 Comments on the First Exposure Draft and Responses 19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 ivApril 2021 
 
TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Governed by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons Interested in the Treatment of 
Reinsurance or Similar Risk Transfer Programs Involving Life Insurance, 
Annuities, or Health Benefit Plans in Financial Reports 
 
FROM: Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ:  Proposed Revision of Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 11 
 
This document contains a revision of ASOP No. 11, now titled  Treatment of Reinsurance or 
Similar Risk Transfer Programs Involving Life Insurance, Annuities, or Health Benefit Plans in 
Financial Reports .  
 
History of the Standard 
 
The ASB adopted the original ASOP No. 11, then titled The Treatment of Reinsurance 
Transactions in Life and Health Insurance Company Financial Statements , in 1989. Prior to 
adoption of the standard, Recommendation No. 4 and Interpretation No. 4-A of the Financial 
Reporting Recommendations and Interpretations of the American Academy of Actuaries covered 
certain aspects of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) financial reporting on 
reinsurance ceded by life and health insurance companies. The original standard superseded 
Recommendation No. 4 and Interpretation No. 4-A.  
 
By the early 2000s, reinsurance practice and related accounting guidance had evolved 
significantly for both GAAP and statutory reporting. As a result, in 2005 the ASB decided to 
revise ASOP No. 11. In the 2005 revision, the scope was changed to apply to reinsurance 
transactions involving life and health insurance, rather than to life and health insurance company 
financial statements, as well as to life and health insurance reinsured by property/casualty 
companies. Furthermore, if a company entered into a transaction that involved reinsurance of 
both life/health insurance and property/casualty insurance, the 2005 revision stated that the 
actuary should determine whether ASOP No. 11, ASOP No. 36, Statements of Actuarial Opinion 
Regarding Property/Casualty Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves , or aspects of both are 
most appropriate to determine the proper treatment of the transaction. 
 
Since 2005, significant new guidelines and requirements for life insurance policies and annuity 
contracts have emerged, including the following: 
 
General Changes 
 
 Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; 
 
 Covered Agreement with the European Union; and 
 
 Covered Agreement with the United Kingdom. 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 v 
GAAP Changes 
 
 GAAP – Accounting Standard Update 2018-12 (ASU 2018-12). 
 
Statutory Changes 
 
 Principle-based reserving (PBR) and the accompanying Valuation Manual ; 
 
 Actuarial Guideline 48, Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Requirements for the 
Reinsurance of Policies Required to be Valued under Sections 6 and 7 of the NAIC 
Valuation of Life Insurance Policies Model Regulation (Model 830) , and Term and 
Universal Life Insurance Reserve Financing Model Regulation (Model 787); 
 
 Amendments and recent developments in the Credit for Reinsurance Model Law and 
Regulation and the Nonadmitted and Reinsurance Reform Act;  
 
 State by state requirements for the appointed actuary; and 
 
 Own Risk and Solvency Assessment (ORSA). 
 
New requirements and practices related to health benefit plans have also emerged, including the 
following: 
 
 The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA); 
 
 Increased prevalence of risk sharing with providers; 
 
 Increased prevalence of governmental entities assuming insurance risk; 
 
 Increased use of reinsurance for certain health lines of business, for example, long-term 
care and ACA-compliant business; and 
 
 A greater variety of entities assuming health insurance risk. 
 
The guidance in the standard is being updated to reflect emerging practices driven by this new 
environment. 
 
Exposure Draft 
 
The exposure draft was issued in November 2019 with a comment deadline of June 30, 2020. 
Two comment letters were received and considered in making changes that are reflected in this 
ASOP.  
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 viNotable Changes from Exposure Draft 
 
Notable changes made to the exposure draft are summarized below. Notable changes do not 
include changes that were made to improve readability, clarity, or consistency. 
 
1. The title of the standard was changed to reflect the expanded scope. 
 
2. In section 1.2, an edit was made to clarify that similar risk transfer programs were 
included in scope. To illustrate how this expansion applies to self-insured programs an 
example was added. 
 
3. In section 2, definitions of “assuming entity” and “ceding entity” were added, and the 
definitions of “nonproportional feature,” “reinsurance agreement,” and “reinsurance 
program” were clarified. 
  
4. Section 3.2, Financial Reports, was broken up into its two constituent parts, now section 
3.2, Impact of Risks Reinsured, and section 3.3, Impact of Risks Retained. 
 
5. Section 3.3(c) was modified to clarify that assumptions need to be reasonable not just in 
aggregate but also individually. 
 
6. A new section 3.4 was added to consolidate guidance on modeling. 
 
7. In section 3.4, guidance now in ASOP No. 56, Modeling , was replaced by references to 
ASOP No. 56. 
 
8. Section 3.9(c) was expanded to recognize that reinsurance performance can be assured 
via collateral or other forms of security. 
 
 
Notable Changes from the Existing Standard 
 
A cumulative summary of the notable changes from the existing standard are summarized below. 
Notable changes do not include additional changes made to improve readability, clarity, or 
consistency. 
 
1. The title of the standard was changed to reflect the expanded scope. 
 
2. In section 1.2, the scope was clarified and expanded both to include risk transfer 
programs similar to reinsurance and to apply to internal and external financial reports, 
rather than only financial statements.  
 
3. The guidance related to health benefit plans was reviewed and expanded throughout 
section 3.  
 
4. Guidance was clarified and expanded throughout section 3.2.  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 vii 
5. Guidance was added on the financial reporting aspects of nonguaranteed reinsurance 
elements in section 3.2(a). 
 
6. Guidance was added on the impact of risks retained in section 3.3. 
 
7. Guidance on modeling was added throughout the standard. 
 
8. Guidance related to counterparty risk was added in section 3.5. 
 
9. Guidance was added on the impact of nonguaranteed elements of the policies being 
reinsured in sections 3.2, 3.7, 3.9(a), and 3.9(b). 
 
10. Disclosures were added in sections 3 and 4 to match the clarifications and expansions 
made in section 3. 
 
 
The ASB thanks everyone who took the time to contribute comments and suggestions on the 
exposure draft.  
 
The ASB voted in April 2021 to adopt this standard. 
  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 viii Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 11 
 
Jeremy Starr, Chairperson 
Patrick L. Collins  Leonard Mangini 
Thomas J. Heckel  Martin Snow 
Annette V. James   
 
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Linda M. Lankowski, Chairperson 
Janice A. Duff   Gabriel Schiminovich 
Lisa S. Kuklinski  Jeremy Starr 
Donna C. Megregian    
 
 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
 Darrell D. Knapp, Chairperson 
Elizabeth K. Brill   Cande J. Olsen  
Robert M. Damler  Kathleen A. Riley 
Kevin M. Dyke   Judy K. Stromback 
David E. Neve  Patrick B. Woods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets standards for appropriate actuarial practice in the 
United States through the development and promulgation of Actuarial Standards of Practice 
(ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the procedures an actuary should follow when performing 
actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose when communicating the results 
of those services. 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 1  
ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE NO. 11 
 
TREATMENT OF REINSURANCE OR SIMILAR RISK TRANSFER PROGRAMS 
INVOLVING LIFE INSURANCE, ANNUITIES,  
OR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS IN FINANCIAL REPORTS 
 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 
1.1 Purpose—This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP or standard) provides guidance to 
actuaries when performing actuarial services with respect to financial reports  that reflect 
reinsurance programs  that involve life insurance, annuities, or health benefit plans .  
 
1.2 Scope—This standard applies to actuaries when performing actuarial services in 
connection with preparing, determining, analyzing, or reviewing financial reports  for 
internal or external use that reflect reinsurance or  similar risk transfer programs on life 
insurance, annuities, or health benefit plans . Throughout this standard, the word 
“preparing” includes determining, analyzing, and reviewing. If the actuary is performing 
actuarial services that involve reviewing  financial reports  for internal or external use that 
reflect reinsurance programs , the actuary should use the guidance in section 3 to the 
extent practicable.  
 
To the extent that life insurance, annuities, or health benefit plans  are reinsured by a 
property/casualty company or through risk financing systems (such as government-
sponsored reinsurance pools and programs, or securitization products) , this standard 
applies. To the extent that self-insured plans buy third-party insurance, such as employer 
stop-loss insurance, this standard applies. To the extent that a self-insured plan is a stand-
alone product with no third-party involvement, this standard does not apply.  
 
If a reinsurance program includes property/casualty coverages, along with life insurance, 
annuities, or health benefit plans , the actuary should use professional judgment to 
determine whether this standard; ASOP No. 36, Statements of Actuarial Opinion 
Regarding Property/Casualty Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves;  ASOP No. 43, 
Property/Casualty Unpaid Claim Estimates;  or aspects of all three standards apply.  
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with 
applicable law (statutes, regulations, and other legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, the actuary should refer to section 4. If a conflict 
exists between this standard and applicable law, the actuary should comply with applicable 
law.  
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 2 1.3 Cross References—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the originally referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 
1.4 Effective Date—This standard is effective for actuarial services performed in connection 
with financial reports issued on or after  December 1, 2022.  
 
 
Section 2. Definitions 
 
The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice and appear in bold 
throughout the standard. 
 
2.1 Assuming Entity—The entity accepting insurance risk in a reinsurance agreement , such 
as an insurer accepting risk from a stop-loss program, a reinsurer accepting risk from an 
insurance company, or a retrocessionaire accepting risk from a reinsurer. 
 
2.2 Ceding Entity—The entity that is transferring insurance risk in a reinsurance agreement , 
such as an employer transferring risk under a stop-loss arrangement, an insurance company 
transferring risk to a reinsurer, or a reinsurer transferring risk to a retrocessionaire.   
 
2.3 Collectability of Reinsurance Proceeds—The ability of the counterparty  to obtain funds 
owed to it according to the terms of the reinsurance program . 
 
2.4 Counterparty—Another entity involved in the reinsurance program including, but not 
limited to, ceding entity , assuming entity , or a service provider . 
 
2.5 Counterparty Risk—The risk that any counterparty  does not fulfill its contractual 
obligations.  
 
2.6 Financial Report A report that conveys the performance or experience of an assuming 
entity or ceding entity  at a specific point in time or over an accounting or measurement 
period. The financial report  may be based on any financial reporting regime appropriate 
to the assignment. Examples of financial reports  include, but are not limited to, statutory 
financial statements, own risk and solvency assessment (ORSA) reports, enterprise risk 
management (ERM) reports, GAAP financial statements, asset adequacy analysis reports, 
and experience study reports. 
 
2.7 Health Benefit Plan A contract, such as an insurance policy, or other financial 
arrangement providing medical, prescription drug, dental, vision, disability income, long-
term care, critical illness, accidental death and dismemberment, or other health-related 
benefits, whether on a reimbursement, indemnity, or service benefit basis, regardless of the 
form of the risk-bearing entity.  
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 3 2.8 Model A simplified representation of relationships among real world variables, entities, 
or events using statistical, financial, economic, mathematical, non-quantitative, or 
scientific concepts and equations. 
 
2.9 Net Liabilities Reserves (net of reinsurance reserve credits), plus any other liabilities 
(such as amounts due the assuming entity ), less any other assets arising from a 
reinsurance program (such as amounts receivable from the assuming entity  or deferred 
acquisition costs), for the reinsured block of business. 
 
2.10 Net Retained Business The portion of the business written or assumed by the ceding 
entity that is not subject to the reinsurance program . 
 
2.11 Nonguaranteed Reinsurance Elements Any premium, charge, or benefit within a 
reinsurance program  that affects reinsurance costs or values, is not guaranteed in the 
reinsurance program , and can be changed at the discretion of the assuming entity  or 
service provider . A nonguaranteed reinsurance element  may provide a more favorable 
value to the ceding entity  than an element that is guaranteed in the policy. Examples of 
nonguaranteed reinsurance elements  are the premiums in a yearly renewable term 
reinsurance agreement  that are defined as nonguaranteed and service provider  fees that 
can be contractually changed. 
 
2.12 Nonproportional Feature—A feature of a reinsurance agreement  that makes the 
assuming entity’s  loss experience disproportionate to that of the ceding entity , such as 
the assuming entity  agreeing to reimburse the ceding entity  for losses above a 
predetermined aggregate level and up to an aggregate reimbursement limit. Other examples 
of such nonproportional features  include aggregate claim limits, deductibles, limited 
coverage periods, stop-loss coverage, layers of claims covered (such as claims starting and 
ending at defined levels), and separate but related reinsurance agreements  (i.e., where the 
results of one reinsurance agreement  affect the operation of the other). 
 
2.13 Reinsurance Agreement—An agreement whereby one or more elements of risk contained 
in insurance contracts or self-insured benefit plans are transferred from a ceding entity  to 
an assuming entity  in return for some consideration.  
 
2.14 Reinsurance Assumed—Reinsurance as it affects the assuming entity  under a reinsurance 
agreement . 
  
2.15 Reinsurance Ceded—Reinsurance as it affects the ceding entity  under a reinsurance 
agreement .  
 
2.16 Reinsurance Program—The combination of the reinsurance agreement(s) , its associated 
service contracts, and their implementation.  Activities under a  reinsurance program  
include but are not limited to sales, underwriting, claims adjudication, and administration, 
which might be affected by volume-based or performance-based fees or commissions. 
When using the term reinsurance program  in this standard, the term will also include 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 4 reference to similar risk transfer programs, such as employer stop-loss insurance, 
government-sponsored reinsurance pools and programs, or securitization products. 
 
2.17 Service Provider—An entity other than the assuming entity  and ceding entity  providing 
contractual services related to a reinsurance agreement , such as reinsurance 
intermediaries, managing general underwriters, captive manager, third-party 
administrators (TPAs), claims managers, investment advisors, investment managers, 
information technology providers (such as cloud data services and credit reporting 
agencies), and trustees. 
 
 
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 
3.1 Reinsurance Program Features—When preparing financial reports , the actuary should 
take into account aspects of relevant reinsurance program(s) , including the following: 
 
a. the risks transferred in the reinsurance agreement ; 
 
b. the structure of the reinsurance agreement . The structure includes but is not 
limited to the type of the reinsurance agreement  (for example, coinsurance), 
whether the risk(s) transferred are in the form of a proportional or nonproportional 
feature, and the parameters (quota share percentage, issue age, attachment point, 
etc.) associated with the reinsured portion(s) of the business; and  
  
c. the responsibilities of any service providers , if applicable.  
 
3.2 Impact of Risks Reinsured—When analyzing the impact of risks reinsured under a 
reinsurance program , the actuary should take into account the following:  
 
a. how the terms and conditions of the reinsurance program , including 
nonguaranteed reinsurance elements , impact the expected cash flows. Examples 
of items that may impact cash flows include but are not limited to premiums, risk 
fees, allowances, benefits, expenses, experience refunds, investment income, 
modified coinsurance reserve adjustments, nonproportional features , 
policyholder dividends and other nonguaranteed elements of the policies being 
reinsured, provider risk-sharing agreements, termination provisions of the 
reinsurance agreement , and volume or other bonuses (including any contingent 
payments);  
 
b. how activities that are performed by service providers  impact reinsurance cash 
flows; 
 
c. penalties, if any, for not performing as required under the terms and conditions of 
the reinsurance program , such as interest penalties, and the likelihood of such 
penalties; 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 5 d. the impact on reinsurance cash flows, if any, of the contractual activities performed 
by the assuming entity  or the ceding entity  participating in the reinsurance 
agreement  (for example, the ability of the assuming entity  to influence the timing, 
size, and nature of potential rates charged by the ceding entity  to policyholders, or 
claims handling practices, or the ability of the ceding entity  to change 
nonguaranteed elements of the policies being reinsured);  
 
e. the impact of counterparty risk  to a reinsurance program  on reinsurance cash 
flows (for more on counterparty risk , see section 3.5); 
 
f. how the collectability of reinsurance proceeds  associated with the reinsurance 
program  impacts cash flows. Considerations include but are not limited to the 
ability of the assuming entity  to meet its obligations, the impact of state or federal 
law on the collectability of reinsurance  proceeds , the ability of the assuming 
entity to interpret direct policy language to impact the amount of claims 
reimbursed, or the ability of the ceding entity  to meet its obligations under the 
reinsurance program ; 
 
g. the impact of incentives or disincentives, if any, on the performance of the 
reinsurance program  activities (for example, compensation of employees, fees to 
third parties, or the terms and conditions of the reinsurance program );  
 
h. the impact on reinsurance cash flows of the investment policy of the holder or 
manager of the assets under the reinsurance agreement . When determining 
whether the investment policy impacts cash flows, the actuary should take into 
account the following: 
 
1. the contractual, legal, market, or regulatory constraints; 
 
2. the impact of deviation from the expected investment policy on cash flows; 
and  
 
3. influence of sections 3.2.(h)(1) and 3.2(h)(2) on changes to investment 
policies in the future, such as the ability to reinvest future cash flows in 
similar assets; 
 
i. the impact on reinsurance cash flows of operational risks such as poor training, 
inadequate or malfunctioning technology, unreliable data, and poor processes; and 
 
j. the impact of the reinsurance program  on reinsured business as reflected in  the 
model(s) used in preparing the financial report and the consistency of this impact 
relative to other models, both past and current, used by the entity. 
 
3.3  Impact of Risks Retained—When analyzing the impact of risks retained under the terms 
and conditions of any  reinsurance program , the actuary should take into account the 
following:  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 6  
a. the potential impact of the existence of a reinsurance program  on assumptions 
associated with the net retained business . For example, policies below an excess 
of retention reinsurance program  may be managed differently due to the presence 
of reinsurance on the excess of retention business, or the assuming entity  may have 
the ability to influence the timing, size, and nature of potential rates charged by the 
ceding entity  to all policyholders; 
 
b. the consistency of assumptions and methods regarding risks associated with the net 
retained business that are impacted by the existence of a reinsurance program 
with other assumptions and methods used in the current and prior financial reports . 
When the actuary uses different assumptions or methods in the current financial 
report, the actuary should document those differences and the rationale for the 
differences; 
 
c. the reasonableness, individually and in aggregate, of assumptions regarding risks 
associated with the net retained business that are impacted by the existence of a 
reinsurance program . When the actuary uses different assumptions before and 
after reflecting the reinsurance program  in the financial reports , the actuary 
should document those differences and the rationale for doing so;  
 
d. the impact of the reinsurance program  on the investment policy of the holder or 
manager of the assets associated with the net retained business . When determining 
whether the reinsurance program  impacts the investment policy, the actuary 
should take into account the following:  
 
1. the contractual, legal, market, or regulatory constraints;  
 
2. the impact of deviation from the expected investment policy on cash flows; 
and 
 
3. the influence of sections 3.3(d)(1) and 3.3(d)(2)on changes to investment 
policies in the future, such as the ability to reinvest future cash flows in 
similar assets; 
 
e. the impact of the reinsurance program  on net retained business  as reflected in  
the model(s) used in preparing the financial report and the consistency of this 
impact relative to other models, both past and current, used by the entity; and 
 
f. the impact on the cash flows of the net retained business  caused by the contractual 
activities performed by the assuming entity  and ceding entity  participating in the 
reinsurance agreement  (for example, the ability of the assuming entity  to 
influence the timing, size, and nature of potential rates charged by the ceding entity  
to policyholders, or claims handling practices). 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 7 In addition to the guidance in sections 3.2 and 3.3, the actuary should follow the financial 
reporting regime’s requirements for taking account of any credit in the financial report  
for the risk mitigation impact of the reinsurance program .  
 
3.4 Models Used in Preparing Financial Reports—When preparing financial reports , the 
actuary should take into account the implications of modeling the reinsurance program  
including: 
 
a. how the terms and conditions of the reinsurance program  are reflected in the 
model(s) or the implementation of the model(s).  When doing so, the actuary should 
refer to ASOP No. 56, Modeling ; and 
 
b. how the assumptions used in the model(s):  
 
1. appropriately reflect the terms and conditions of the reinsurance program . 
When making this determination, the actuary should identify and take into 
account the following: 
 
i. the purpose of the assignment; 
 
ii. the guidance in ASOP No. 23, Data Quality,  on the consideration 
and the choice of data underlying the assumptions; and 
 
iii. the guidance in ASOP No. 25, Credibility Procedures , on the 
consideration of the credibility of data underlying the assumptions;  
 
2. contain appropriate margins, for example, for uncertainty, statistical error, 
or conservatism; and 
 
c. the guidance in ASOP No. 56 related to assumptions used in the model(s). 
 
3.5  Assessing and Analyzing the Impact of Counterparty Risk—The actuary should take into 
account counterparty risks  that could impact the financial report  including, but not 
limited to, the following:  
 
a. the ability of an entity to meet its obligations under the reinsurance program ; 
 
b. the collectability of reinsurance proceeds or lag time in collection of any funds 
owed under the reinsurance program , such as reinsurance claims or reinsurance 
premiums;  
 
c. performance risk of counterparties  who are performing specific services related 
to the reinsurance agreement , such as a counterparty  not performing to 
established guidelines, a TPA not paying claims on time, or an investment 
manager not adhering to investment guidelines;  
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 8 d. any collateral that has been posted in relation to the reinsurance agreement and 
its amount, quality, and permitted uses, as defined by regulation and the 
reinsurance agreement ;  
 
e. the measurement of the effectiveness of the procedures designed to identify or 
mitigate the counterparty  risk;  
 
f. the counterparty’s  financial health, stability, enterprise risk management (ERM) 
practices, and changes therein. Examples include financial strength ratings, 
investment policy, required capital, capital, and the risk level of the types of 
business written or assumed;  
 
g. any counterparty  contractual features or risk management policies that might 
affect the risk, such as parental guarantees, letters of credit, or alternative 
coverage; and 
 
h. the holder or manager, if different from the owner, of the assets under the 
reinsurance agreement  and the implications of this arrangement. 
 
3.6 Assessing and Analyzing the Risks Being Transferred in a Reinsurance Program—When 
preparing a financial report  to assess and analyze the risks being transferred in a 
reinsurance program , the actuary should take into account the terms and conditions of 
the reinsurance program . The actuary should also take into account how the risks being 
transferred compare to the risk appetite of the ceding entity  or assuming entity , as 
applicable, including the following:  
 
a. a comparison of the original goals for the reinsurance program  versus the 
reinsurance program’s  actual performance; 
 
b. the degree of risk mitigation or acceptance that reflects the risk tolerances and risk 
appetite as of the time of the financial report ; and 
 
c. changes in the risk mitigation or acceptance goals.  
 
When preparing a financial report  to assess and analyze a reinsurance program for the 
purposes of ERM or ORSA, the actuary should refer to ASOP Nos. 46, Risk Evaluation in 
Enterprise Risk Management,  and 47, Risk Treatment in Enterprise Risk Management . 
 
3.7 Treatment of Reinsurance Risks—When preparing values related to a reinsurance 
program  in a financial report , the actuary should take into account the purposes of the 
financial report , factoring in the applicable accounting and regulatory requirements or 
guidance, as well as the terms and conditions of the reinsurance program  and its 
associated risks. Examples of risks associated with the reinsurance program  include but 
are not limited to counterparty risk , lack of reinsurance program  controls, untimely 
payments, volatility of experience refunds, nonguaranteed reinsurance elements , 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 9 nonguaranteed elements of the policies being reinsured, the structure of the reinsurance 
agreement , and investment philosophy. 
 
3.7.1  Treatment of Reinsurance Ceded—When preparing values related to reinsurance 
ceded, the actuary should do so  without relying upon the values of financial 
statement items held by the assuming entity . The actuary may use data provided 
by the assuming entity  in calculating financial statement values (see ASOP No. 
52, Principle-Based Reserves for Life Products under the NAIC Valuation Manual , 
and sections 3.11-3.15 of this standard). Because the ceding entity  and the 
assuming entity  each establish and test statement liabilities and assets 
independently, it is possible for the value of the net liabilities  held by the ceding 
entity, plus those held by the assuming entity  on a reinsured contract, to be more 
or less than the amount that would have been held if the ceding entity  had not 
reinsured the contract. For example, the two counterparties  may have different 
expectations for assumptions that impact liabilities or investment returns.  
  
3.7.2 Treatment of Reinsurance Assumed—The actuary should take into account the 
following regarding the treatment of  reinsurance assumed : 
 
a. the features and risks of the business assumed, such as lack of control over 
the ceding entity’s  investment philosophy, nonguaranteed elements of the 
policies being reinsured, other risk-sharing arrangements, dividends, 
marketing, underwriting practices, or claims adjudication and management 
practices, or in-force management practices; and  
 
b. the features and risks of the reinsurance program  referenced in sections 
3.2 and 3.3. 
 
The actuary should also consider whether adjustments to data are needed based on 
the quality and credibility of data when preparing a financial report  or other 
information exchanged between the counterparties . When adjusting the data, the 
actuary should refer to ASOP Nos. 23 and 25 for guidance. 
 
3.8 Risk of Termination of Reinsurance Programs—When preparing financial reports , the 
actuary should reflect the following:  
 
a. the impact of the potential termination of reinsurance programs  on the obligations 
of the counterparties , including post-termination obligations; 
 
b. how the following factors affect the risk of termination including: 
 
1. the terms and conditions of the reinsurance program ;  
 
2. the regulatory and financial reporting regime governing the financial 
report; 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 10 3. the known business practices of the counterparties ; and 
 
4. the current and potential internal and external environments faced by the 
counterparties .  
 
Examples of potential termination events include but are not limited to the following:  
 
i. reinsurance agreements  that end prior to underlying risk terminating; 
 
ii. termination due to regulatory intervention; 
 
iii. termination due to inability of a ceding entity  to pay reinsurance premiums; 
 
iv. termination due to an assuming entity  exercising rights to change the reinsurance 
agreement ; 
 
v. recapture or commutation specified or permitted by the reinsurance agreement ; 
 
vi. termination due to the financial difficulties of an assuming entity ; 
 
vii. partial termination of reinsurance agreement  due to a partial recapture;  
 
viii. partial termination of reinsurance agreements  due to a ceding entity  losing its 
license; and 
 
ix. termination due to inability of service providers  to perform as specified in their 
agreement. 
 
The actuary should consider performing scenario testing to quantify the impact of a 
potential termination of a reinsurance program  on a financial report .  
 
3.9 Additional Liabilities, Reserves, or Allocation of Capital—The actuary should consider 
establishing additional liabilities, reserves, or allocation of capital based upon the terms 
and conditions of the reinsurance program . When considering this issue, the actuary 
should use assumptions consistent with the purpose of the financial report . Examples of 
situations where additional liabilities, reserves, or allocation of capital may be needed 
include but are not limited to the following: 
 
a. an assuming entity  having the right to change nonguaranteed reinsurance 
elements on in-force business without a corresponding right by the ceding entity  
to change nonguaranteed elements of the policies being reinsured or terminate the 
reinsurance agreement ;  
 
b. recapture by a ceding entity  due to an assuming entity  changing nonguaranteed 
reinsurance elements  on in-force business; or 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 11 c. an assuming entity’s  inability to post the amount of collateral or level of security 
required by agreement or regulation. 
 
3.10 Accounting Guidance—When preparing values  in the financial report  that reflect the 
terms of a reinsurance program , the actuary should take into account applicable 
accounting guidance. The actuary should determine whether a particular reinsurance 
agreement  qualifies as reinsurance for statutory, GAAP, or other purposes, and how this 
may affect the accounting treatment.  
 
3.11  Experience Analysis—When preparing a financial report  to analyze the actual-to-
expected financial experience of a reinsurance agreement , the actuary should establish 
a baseline to be used as a source of comparison. An example of a baseline is the results 
of the final model(s) used in analyzing the reinsurance proposal at the time of entering 
the reinsurance agreement . 
 
Examples of how to analyze actual-to-expected financial experience include loss ratios and 
actual-to-expected mortality experience. The actuary should use professional judgment and 
consider the needs of the principal when deciding which form of analysis to choose. 
 
3.12 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others—When relying on data or other 
information supplied by others, the actuary should refer to ASOP Nos. 23, 41, Actuarial 
Communications , and 56, and, where appropriate, ASOP Nos. 10,  Methods and 
Assumptions for Use in Life Insurance Company Financial Statements Prepared in 
Accordance with U.S. GAAP,  or 52, for guidance. The actuary should disclose the extent 
of any such reliance.  
 
3.13  Reliance on Assumptions or Methods Selected by Another Party—When relying on 
assumptions or methods supplied by another party, the actuary should review the 
assumptions or methods for reasonableness and consistency. For further guidance, the 
actuary should refer to ASOP No. 41. The actuary should disclose the extent of any such 
reliance. 
 
3.14  Reliance on Models Developed by Others—If the actuary relies on a model(s) designed, 
developed, or modified by others, such as a vendor or colleague, the actuary should review 
the model(s) for compliance with the applicable sections of this standard and with ASOP 
No. 56 as it applies to models developed by others. The actuary should document and 
disclose the extent of any such reliance. If the actuary adjusts the model(s), the actuary 
should document and disclose the adjustments.  
 
3.15 Reliance on Another Actuary—The actuary may rely on another actuary who has provided 
input to the financial report . However, the relying actuary should be reasonably satisfied 
that the other actuary is qualified to supply information for the financial report , the 
information supplied was compiled in accordance with applicable standards, and the 
information supplied is appropriate for the particular financial report  being prepared. The 
actuary should disclose the extent of any such reliance. 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 12 3.16 Reliance on Expertise of Others—An actuary may rely on the expertise of others 
(including actuaries not performing actuarial services) in the fields of knowledge used in 
preparing the financial report . In determining the appropriate level of reliance, the 
actuary should take into account the following: 
 
a. whether the individual or individuals upon whom the actuary is relying have 
expertise in the applicable field; 
 
b. the extent to which the input provided for the financial report  has been reviewed 
or opined on by others with expertise in the applicable field;  
 
c. whether there are legal, regulatory, professional, industry, or other standards that 
apply to the input for the financial report  supplied by others with expertise in the 
applicable field, and whether the input has been represented as having met such 
standards. For example, it is often the case in reinsurance that an actuary relies 
upon an accountant or a lawyer to determine whether a reinsurance agreement  
meets regulatory requirements to be accounted for as reinsurance; and 
 
d. whether the input to the financial report  supplied was relevant and useful to the 
purpose of the financial report . 
 
The actuary should disclose the extent of any such reliance. 
 
3.17 Documentation—In addition to the documentation requirements throughout the rest of 
section 3, the actuary should consider preparing and retaining documentation to support 
compliance with the requirements of section 3 and the disclosure requirements of section 
4. If preparing such documentation, the actuary should prepare documentation in a form 
such that another actuary qualified in the same practice area could assess the 
reasonableness of the actuary’s work. The degree of such documentation should be based 
on the professional judgment of the actuary and may vary with the complexity and purpose 
of the actuarial services. In addition, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 41 for guidance 
related to the retention of file material other than that which is to be disclosed under section 
4.  
 
 
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 
 
4.1 Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report—When issuing an actuarial report to which 
this standard applies, the actuary should refer to ASOP Nos. 10, 23, 25, 41, 46, 47, 52, and 
56. In addition, the actuary should disclose the following in such actuarial reports, as 
applicable: 
 
a. features of the reinsurance program(s)  being analyzed in the financial report , as 
discussed in section 3.1; 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 13 b. impacts on the financial report  caused by the terms of the reinsurance 
program(s)  or the practices of any of the parties to the reinsurance program(s)  
as discussed in sections 3.2 and 3.3;  
 
c. assumptions used in the financial report  that are inconsistent either across time or 
different lines of business, and an explanation for the inconsistency, as discussed 
in sections 3.3(a), 3.3(b), and 3.3(c); 
 
d. description of the model(s) and assumptions, including a summary of how the 
model(s) and assumptions meet the conditions in sections 3.2(j), 3.3(e), and 3.4;  
 
e. unresolved concerns the actuary has about reinsurance information (for example, 
reinsurance settlement data, in-force information, and legal agreements) that, in the 
actuary’s professional judgment, could have an effect on the actuarial work product, 
as discussed in sections 3.2(i), 3.5, and 3.7; 
 
f. the impact of the following risks on the results presented in the report:   
 
i. variation in assumptions or methods over time, if any, as discussed in 
sections 3.3(a) and 3.3(b) ; 
 
ii. nonguaranteed  reinsurance elements  in a reinsurance agreement , as 
discussed in sections 3.2(a), 3.2(d), 3.7, 3.9(a), and 3.9(b); 
 
iii. counterparty risk , as discussed in section 3.2(e) and 3.5;  
 
iv. non-performance of service providers , if any, as discussed in sections 
3.2(b), 3.2(g), 3.2(h), 3.3(d), and 3.5; and 
 
v. termination of reinsurance programs , as discussed in section 3.8. 
 
g. the potential impact of risks associated with the reinsurance program , as 
discussed in sections 3.2, 3.3, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9; 
 
h. additional reserves that needed to be established due to the nature of the 
reinsurance agreement  and the rationale for such additional reserves, as discussed 
in section 3.9;  
 
i. the extent of reliance on data or other information supplied by others, if any, used 
in preparing the financial report , as discussed in section 3.12;  
   
j. the extent of reliance on others for assumptions or methods used in financial 
reports, including any adjustments made to assumptions or methods, and the steps 
taken to review the assumptions or methods for reasonableness and consistency, as 
discussed in section 3.13; 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 14 k. the extent of reliance on model(s) developed by others, if any, as discussed in 
section 3.14;  
 
l. adjustments made to the model(s) supplied by another party and upon which the 
actuary is relying, as discussed in section 3.14;  
 
m. the extent of reliance on other actuaries, if any, for input used in preparing the 
financial report , as discussed in section 3.15; and 
 
n. the extent of reliance on the expertise of others, if any, for input used in preparing 
the financial report , as discussed in section 3.16. 
 
4.2  Additional Disclosures in an Actuarial Report—The actuary also should include 
disclosures in accordance with ASOP No. 41 in an actuarial report for the following 
circumstances:  
 
a.  if any material assumption or method was prescribed by applicable law; 
 
b.  if the actuary states reliance on other sources and thereby disclaims responsibility 
for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; 
and 
 
c.  if in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary has deviated materially from 
the guidance of this standard. 
  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 15 Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices 
 
Note: The following material is provided for informational purposes and is not part of the 
standard of practice.  
 
 
Background 
 
Actuarial practice with respect to reinsurance, as well as the complexity of reinsurance programs, 
has evolved significantly since the 2005 version of ASOP No. 11, the last time the standard was 
adopted. Significant new laws, regulations, and accounting requirements for life insurance 
policies, annuity contracts, and health benefit plans have also emerged. These refinements have 
led to this revision of ASOP No. 11. 
 
Financial reports involving reinsurance must comply with many accounting requirements, laws, 
and regulations. These requirements relate to, for example, whether the reinsurance agreement 
should be accounted for as reinsurance or as a deposit, the nature and amount of collateral that is 
required for a reserve credit to be allowed in the financial report, and the types of assets that must 
back certain kinds of reserves.  
 
The presentation of the components of the net liabilities may vary under different accounting 
principles. For example, reserves other than principle-based reserves (PBR) are shown net of 
reinsurance ceded in statutory financial reports. PBR are currently calculated pre-reinsurance, 
then post-reinsurance, with the difference being the reinsurance reserve credit. Reserves are 
generally presented on a gross basis before reinsurance in GAAP financial reports with the 
reinsurance credit reported as an offsetting asset. This difference in presentation affects the 
analysis that goes into a financial report. 
 
Requirements relating to risk transfer must also be met in order to receive reinsurance accounting 
treatment under the requirements of Statutory Statement of Accounting Principles (SSAP) No. 
61R, which incorporates related guidance in Appendices A-785 and A-791 of the NAIC 
Accounting Practices and Procedures Manual .  
 
Statutory accounting requires any increase in after-tax initial surplus impact from the reinsurance 
of an existing block of business to be reflected directly through surplus at the inception of the 
reinsurance agreement. The resulting impact to surplus is then amortized into income over the 
life of the reinsured business. If the initial impact of a reinsurance program is negative, that 
impact flows immediately through earnings. 
 
While assumption and indemnity reinsurance are both labeled as reinsurance, they are two 
different forms of transactions. With indemnity reinsurance, the policyholder’s relationship 
remains with the ceding entity. An assumption reinsurance transaction is a sale of business such 
that the policyholder’s direct relationship is with the “assuming entity.” This difference results in 
a different financial statement presentation for the two types of transactions. The presentation in 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 16 financial reports differs for assumption reinsurance agreements and indemnity reinsurance 
agreements. Under indemnity reinsurance agreements, the ceding entity remains legally 
responsible for all policyholder obligations of the reinsured policies. The assuming entity 
indemnifies, or protects, the ceding entity against one or more of the risks in the reinsured 
policies. Under an assumption reinsurance agreement, the ceding entity is relieved of 
responsibility for the policies reinsured, and the contracts are accounted for by the assuming 
entity in the same manner as direct business. The assuming entity assumes all of the obligations 
formerly assumed by the ceding entity. Typically, regulatory and policyholder approval is 
required. When a company intends to enter into an assumption reinsurance agreement, an 
indemnity reinsurance agreement may be used for policies not yet covered by the assumption 
reinsurance agreement.  
 
The ceding entity is responsible for assessing the collectability of reinsurance proceeds, 
including determining whether the portion that is non-collectable should be written down. 
Considerations include financial strength and liquidity of the assuming entity, court or arbitration 
findings, and other market forces.  
 
Since the 2005 version of this standard was adopted, revisions and new model regulations have 
significantly changed the nature of reinsurance. One example is the Term and Universal Life 
Insurance Reserve Financing Model Regulation (Model 787). For reinsurance agreements 
completed after a certain date for level term and universal life with secondary guarantee policies, 
Model 787 requires that the calculation of reserves be broken into two pieces and that each piece 
has a specified type of assets to back them.  
 
The first piece is reserves calculated using the Actuarial Method, a method similar to PBR, but 
not identical (for example, exclusion testing to determine whether to calculate reserves on a 
deterministic or stochastic basis is not permitted). These reserves are to be backed by primary 
securities, defined in the model as certain highly rated securities. Any excess in statutorily 
required reserves over those calculated using the Actuarial Method would be backed by a 
combination of primary and other securities. These other securities may include any investments 
acceptable to the company’s domiciliary regulator. 
 
Effective on January 1, 2015, the Risk Management and Own Risk and Solvency Assessment 
Model Act (Model 505) requires that medium and large insurance groups regularly perform an 
own risk and solvency assessment (ORSA). The ORSA is a detailed examination of the 
adequacy of a company’s risk management and solvency positions under normal and severe 
stress scenarios. Reinsurance is often used in a company’s risk management program.  
  
Under the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd–Frank), if a 
state is accredited by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) or has 
solvency standards similar to those mandated by the NAIC, reinsurance reserve credit cannot be 
denied by other states. In other words, if a ceding entity’s domestic regulator complies with these 
requirements, another US jurisdiction cannot deny reinsurance credit. Further, for an insurer that 
is predominantly an assuming entity and is domiciled in an NAIC-accredited state or in one that 
has solvency standards similar to those mandated by the NAIC, its sole solvency regulator is its 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 17 domiciliary regulator. Further, no other state can require it to produce financial reports other than 
those required by their domiciliary regulator. 
 
Another aspect of the Dodd–Frank Act is a provision that allows the U.S. to negotiate an agreement 
(called a covered agreement) with another country or jurisdiction that will impact the provision of 
reinsurance by companies domiciled in the other jurisdiction. Two such agreements have been 
negotiated, one with the E.U. and the other with the U.K. A feature of both of these agreements is 
that no collateral need be posted under certain conditions. This affects the financial report analysis 
by allowing the ceding entity to reduce the amount of reserves held backing reinsured business, 
without having to require the counterparty to establish collateral if the reinsurance agreement and 
the parties to the reinsurance agreement meet the requirements of the covered agreement.  
 
Statutory collateral requirements have also been modified since this standard was last revised. 
New types of reinsurers have been defined in the regulation, and international agreements have 
also affected the amount of collateral that must be posted statutorily. Certified reinsurers are non-
U.S. entities that are domiciled in a qualified jurisdiction and maintain certain regulatorily 
mandated conditions. Once certified, depending on the regulatorily assigned rating of the 
certified reinsurer, the amount of collateral the reinsurer is required to post can be significantly 
less than the more typical 100 percent requirement on non-certified, non-E.U., non-U.K. 
reinsurers. An impact of this change is that the ceding entity may have additional counterparty 
risk due to the lack of 100 percent collateral backing a reinsurance agreement with a non-U.S. 
entity. 
 
GAAP has experienced numerous changes with respect to reinsurance under ASU 2018-12. 
Reinsurance assumed is to use the same accounting methodology as direct insurance. 
Reinsurance ceded is to use assumptions that are consistent with the assumptions used for direct 
insurance. While ceded deferred acquisition cost (DAC) is still to be netted against direct DAC, 
impairment testing is no longer required. Cost of reinsurance is to be amortized over the 
remaining life of the agreement. There is also a delinking of invested assets, and therefore even 
when a block of business is 100 percent coinsured, the business will remain on the insurer’s 
books for the life of the business. The standard allows for the reinsurance of market risk in 
products like guaranteed minimum benefits in variable products, under certain conditions. If 
those conditions are not met, then ASC 815 (Derivatives and Hedging) dealing with embedded 
derivatives is invoked. 
 
Since the last revision of ASOP No. 11, much has changed in the health insurance world. The 
types of products offered and the types of entities assuming risk for these health products have 
changed, triggering the rise in the use of reinsurance-type coverages in non-traditional ways.  
 
One feature of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was a temporary transitional reinsurance program 
that was designed to help stabilize the premiums that insurers charge. Since the federal 
transitional reinsurance program expired at the end of 2016, several states have established 
reinsurance programs to stabilize ACA premiums, particularly in the non-group market. These 
state programs are largely fashioned after commercial specific stop-loss insurance products, with 
attachment points, caps, and coinsurance parameters set by the state and may be designed to 
coordinate with any commercial reinsurance purchased by health carriers.  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 18  
Large commercial companies often provide health insurance to their employees on a “self-
insured” basis. In this case, the commercial company assumes the risk for paying claims itself 
and often purchases stop-loss insurance from a third party to mitigate that risk.  
 
The prevalence of risk-sharing arrangements with health care providers has also increased over 
the last decade. In response to this trend, the demand for provider excess loss insurance products 
has increased to help mitigate risk assumed by healthcare providers. Additionally, other risk-
bearing entities have emerged to provide value by assuming health insurance risk. 
 
In response to these changes, the ASB decided to revise this standard. 
 
 
Current Practices 
 
The actuary may perform actuarial services in a variety of areas with respect to reinsurance. The 
following are some examples of the areas the actuary may deal with regarding reinsurance. 
Preparation of regulatory reports involves the analysis of an entity’s reinsurance program. This 
includes preparation of items such as the Actuarial Opinion and Memorandum Report and 
various aspects of a company’s GAAP statement. An actuary may also be called upon to identify 
risks assumed by the entity and how to mitigate those risks. Knowing the nature of and how to 
analyze an entity’s reinsurance program is essential to understanding an entity’s risk profile. An 
actuary may also be called upon to analyze the experience of reinsurance business assumed or 
ceded by an entity. 
  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 19 Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the First Exposure Draft and Responses 
  
The first exposure draft of this standard, Reinsurance Involving Life Insurance, Annuities, or 
Health Benefit Plans in Financial Reports,  was issued in November 2019 with a comment 
deadline of June 30, 2020. Two comment letters were received, both submitted by committees. 
For purposes of this appendix, the term “commentator” may refer to more than one person 
associated with a particular comment letter. The ASOP No. 11 Task Force carefully considered 
all comments received, reviewed the exposure draft, and proposed changes. The ASB Life 
Committee and the ASB reviewed the proposed changes and made modifications where 
appropriate. 
 
Summarized below are the significant issues and questions contained in the comment letters and 
the responses. Minor wording or punctuation changes that were suggested but not significant are 
not reflected in the appendix, although they may have been adopted. 
 
The term “reviewers” in appendix 2 includes the ASOP No. 11 Task Force, the ASB Life 
Committee, and the ASB. Also, unless otherwise noted, the section numbers and titles used in 
appendix 2 refer to those in the first exposure draft. 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator recommended revising the title of the standard to reflect the fact that more than 
just reinsurance is covered.  
 
The reviewers agree that the title needs to be broader to align with the broader scope of the 
standard and changed the title to “Treatment of Reinsurance or Similar Risk Transfer Programs 
Involving Life Insurance, Annuities, or Health Benefit Plans in Fina ncial Reports.”   
TRANSMITTAL MEMORANDUM  
Question #1: Is the scope description relating to the inclusion of self-insurance clear? If not, what 
wording would make it clearer?  
Comment One commentator said the language was generally clear but offered modifications. The comment 
summary and response have been moved to section 1.2 . 
Question #2: Is the guidance sufficient given current laws, regulations, and accounting rules? If not, 
please explain what should be added.  
Comment One commentator suggested modifications to the definition of nonproportional feature in section 
2.10. The c omment summary and response have been moved to section 2.10 . 
Question #3: Are there any areas where the guidance is inconsistent with current practice? If so, please 
explain or provide examples.  
Comment One commentator suggested modifications to sections 2.11, sections 3.1(b), 3.2.1(k)(2), 3.2.2(c), 
3.2.2, and section 3.7(c). These comments and responses ha ve been moved to those sections. 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 20 Question #4: Are there areas where the guidance creates issues with any reinsurance regulatory 
requirements? If so, please explain or provide examples.  
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator expressed concern that certain reinsurance provisions described in this standard 
may not comply with A-791. The commentators did not believe that the guidance itself violated 
any statutory regulation. 
 
The reviewers note that the standard is not limited to statutory accounting and therefore made no 
change in response to this comment . 
Question #5: Are there areas where the guidance creates conflict or introduces ambiguity with 
reinsurance-related guidance in other ASOPs? If so, please explain or provide examples.  
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator said that the standard should restore language from the prior version that said 
the actuary should consider relevant applicable laws and regulations or other binding authority 
affecting reserve credit or accounting for reinsurance. 
 
The reviewers believe that this issue is adequately covered in ASOP No. 1, Introductory Actuarial 
Standard of Practice , and therefore made no change .  
SECTION 1. PURPOSE, SCOPE, CROSS REFERENCES, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
Section 1.2, Scope 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator said that overall responsibility for financial reports generally lies with 
accountants. 
 
The reviewers note that the scope states that the standard covers “performing actuarial services in 
connection with financial reports ” and therefore made no change  in response to this comment .  
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator recommended adding stop-loss as an example of third-party insurance in the 
second sentence of the second paragraph to clarify that stop-loss insurance of self-insured health 
plans is within scope. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.   
Comment 
 
 
 
 
Response One commentator recommended adding references to ASOP No. 5, Incurred Health and 
Disability Claims , and ASOP No. 42, Health and Disability Actuarial Assets and Liabilities Other 
Than Liabilities for Incurred Claims , as applicable, throughout ASOP No. 11 (e.g., considering 
the effect of different lag patterns related to the reinsurance disclosures). 
 
The reviewers believe that these and other potentially relevant standards are covered by ASOP 
No. 1, which states “actuaries are responsible for determining which ASOPs apply to the task at 
hand” and therefore made no change in response to this comment .  
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS 
2.4, Financial Report (now section 2.6) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator said that the definition of “Financial Reports” is too broad and should be 
limited to the types of statements named in the standard. 
 
The reviewers intentionally set a broad scope in order to have the standard remain useful through 
the future evolution of best practices and regulations and innovations in risk management/transfer 
products. The reviewers therefore made no change.   
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator asked whether the definition of “Financial Reports” was overly broad and 
included routine or periodic reports used solely for internal management reporting. 
 
The reviewers note that because a principal relies on an actuary’s work products, the standard 
applies to all such products. The reviewers therefore made no change.   
  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 21 Section 2.10, Nonproportional Feature (now section 2.12) 
Comment 
 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator said that the definition of nonproportional feature could be interpreted to scope 
in certain arrangements that would otherwise be considered proportional, such as a coinsurance 
treaty where there is inuring yearly renewable term (YRT) reinsurance with third-party reinsurers, 
and suggested clarifying language. 
 
The reviewers agree  with the suggested clarifying language and made the ch ange. 
Section 2.11, Reinsurance Agreement (now section 2.13) 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested expanding the definition of Reinsurance Agreement to reflect the 
expanded scope. 
 
The reviewers agree and added a reference to self-insured benefit plans . 
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator said that the adjective “material” is used in some sections but not others (for 
example, section 3.2), may not be used consistently, and should be defined. 
 
In response to this comment, the reviewers deleted “material” from every section except section 4. 
The reviewers note that “materiality” is discussed in ASOP No. 1. Definitions and discussions 
included in ASOP No. 1 are intended to apply to all other standards. 
Section 3.1(b), (Reinsurance Program Features) 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing “or” with “and” in the language describing the structure of 
a reinsurance agreement. 
 
The commentators agree and made the change.  
Section 3.2, Financial Reports (now deleted) 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting section 3.2 because it is unnecessary and renumbering 
sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 sections 3.2 and 3.3, respectively, since the entire standard applies to 
financial reports. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the suggested change.  
Section 3.2.1(a) (Impact of Risks Reinsured) (now section 3.2[a]) 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator asked for a specific reference to ASOP No. 7, Analysis of Life, Health, or 
Property/Casualty Insurer Cash Flows , when discussing how the terms and condition of the 
reinsurance program impact the expected cash flows. 
 
The reviewers do not think a reference is necessary and made no change . 
Section 3.2.1(j) (Impact of Risks Reinsured) (now section 3.4, Models Used in Preparing Financial 
Reports) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “entries in” after “prepare.” 
 
The reviewers disagree and made no change. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “take into account the guidance in ASOP No. 56,  Modeling ; 
and” to the end of the section. 
 
The reviewers agree and added a reference to ASOP No. 56. 
Comment 
 
 
 One commentator suggested that some of the language included in section 3 may be redundant 
with ASOP No. 56. The commentator also suggested adding a reference to the assumptions 
standard. 
 
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 22 Response The reviewers agree that some of the language was redundant with ASOP No. 56, deleted the 
redundant language, and added appropriate references to ASOP No. 56. The reviewers note that 
the assumptions standard has not yet been adopted and therefore a reference is not appropriate at 
this time.  
Section 3.2.1(k) (Impact of Risks Reinsured) (now section 3.4, Models Used in Preparing Financial 
Reports) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding references to ASOP No. 52, Principle-Based Reserves for 
Life Products under the NAIC Valuation Manual , and ASOP No. 56, in section 3.2.1(k)(1). 
 
The reviewers agree that ASOP No. 56 belongs in this section and added a reference. The 
reviewers do not believe that a reference to ASOP No. 52 is needed.  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested using “models” rather than “model” for consistency and 
“inconsistent” rather than “different” in section 3.1(k)2. 
 
The reviewers agree with using “model(s)” throughout. The reviewers replaced section 3.2.1(k)(2) 
with a reference to ASOP No. 56 and moved language on modeling to a new section 3.4 . 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that section 3.2.1(k)(3) should be revised to clarify the intended 
meaning of “company experience.” 
 
The reviewers added a reference to ASOP No. 56 and moved language on modeling to a new 
section 3.4 .  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator recommended adding a definition of “market estimates.” 
 
The reviewers added a reference to ASOP No. 56 and moved language on modeling to a new 
section 3.4 .  
Section 3.2.2, Impact of Risks Retained (now section 3.3) 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested a specific description related to the PBR example given. 
 
The reviewers believe the example is unnecessary and deleted it. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the standard explicitly require individual assumptions to be 
reasonable, in addition to all assumptions being reasonable in aggregate.  
 
The reviewers agree and added language stating that the individual assumptions must also be 
reasonable individually  in section 3.2.2(c) (now section 3.3[c]).  
Section 3.3, Assessing and Analyzing the Impact of Counterparty Risk (now section 3.5) 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested that since a counterparty’s rating may change over time, adherence to 
section 3.3 may prompt more cedants to require collateral on long-duration contracts, which 
would be expensive.  
 
The reviewers believe that this section appropriately addresses the issue and made no change.  
 
  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 23  
Section 3.4, Assessing and Analyzing the Risks Being Transferred in a Reinsurance Program (now 
section 3.6) 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that this section up to the ERM paragraph seems much too extreme 
for each and every financial report and should only apply when the actuary is asked to opine on 
whether the reinsurance program is fulfilling the objectives of the program.  
 
The reviewers disagree. The guidance is focused on “a financial report to assess and analyze the 
risks being transferred in a reinsurance program” not all financial reports and made no change in 
response to this comment . 
Section 3.5.2 (a),  (Treatment of Reinsurance Assumed) (now section 3.7.2[a]) 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator said that the broad statement “or other information exchanged between the 
parties” raised concerns about credibility and reliance. 
 
The reviewers believe the language is appropriate and made no change.  
Section 3.7(c) (Additional Liabilities, Reserves, or Allocation of Capital) (now section 3.9[c]) 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding “or level of security” to clarify the reference to Actuarial 
Guideline 48. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
Section 3.8, Accounting Guidance (now section 3.10)  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator said that the third and fourth sentences were redundant with section 3.14. 
 
The reviewers agree and removed the sentences. 
3.11, Reliance on Assumptions or Methods Set by Another Party (now section 3.13)  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding a reference to ASOP No. 52 in sections 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, and 
3.14. 
 
The reviewers believe the language is appropriate and made no change.  
Section 3.12, Reliance on Models Developed by Others (now section 3.14)  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator questioned the requirements relating to the level of understanding the actuary 
should have about a model they are using to prepare a reinsurance financial report. 
 
The reviewers revised the language to refer to ASOP No. 56, which the ASB adopted after ASOP 
No. 11 was initially exposed.  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator said that this section appears to have been drawn from ASOP No. 56, suggested 
deleting duplicative language and adding a reference to ASOP No. 56 instead. 
 
The reviewers agree and revised the language to refer to ASOP No. 56, which the ASB adopted 
after ASOP No. 11 was initially exposed.  
Section 3.14, Reliance on Experts (now section 3.16, Reliance on the Expertise of Others)  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator said that this section appears to have been drawn from ASOP No. 56, and 
suggested deleting duplicative language and adding a reference to ASOP No. 56 instead. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is  not limited to modeling and made no change.  
  
ASOP No. 11—Doc. No. 199 
 24 SECTION 4. COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES 
4.1, Required Disclosures in an Actuarial Report 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator said that the disclosure requirements of section 4 create a heavy burden with no 
resulting value if they are to be applied to routine, periodic reports used solely for internal 
management reporting. 
 
The reviewers note that because a principal relies on an actuary’s work products, the standard 
applies to all such products. The reviewers therefore made no change.  
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested limiting the disclosures to specific instances, practice areas, or report 
types. 
 
The reviewers note that because a principal relies on an actuary’s work products, the standard 
applies to all such products. The reviewers therefore made no change.   
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested clarifying whether section 4.1 should refer to an actuarial report or 
actuarial communication. 
 
The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate and made no change.  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested adjusting requirements to reflect the intended user. 
 
The reviewers believe this is covered by ASOP No. 41 and made no change. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding references to ASOP Nos. 5, 42, and 56. 
 
The reviewers added references to ASOP No. 56 and ASOP No. 10, Methods and Assumptions for 
Use in Life Insurance Company Financial Statements Prepared in Accordance with U.S. GAAP . 
The reviewers believe that other potentially relevant standards are covered by ASOP No. 1, which 
states “actuaries are responsible for determining which ASOPs apply to the task at hand.”  
 
 
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 15 
 
 
 
Dividends for Individual Participating  
Life Insurance, Annuities, and Disability Insurance  
 
 
 
Revised Edition 
 
  
 
 
 
Developed by the 
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 15 of the 
Life Committee of the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
March 2006 
Updated for Deviation Language Effective May 1, 2011 
 
 
(Doc. No. 134) 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 iiT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S 
 
Transmittal Memorandum                            iv  
STANDARD OF PRACTICE 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1 
1.1 Purpose  1 1.2 Scope  1 1.3 Cross References 1 1.4 Effective Date  1 
 Section 2.  Definitions 2 
2.1 Actual Experience 2 2.2 Contribution Principle 2 2.3 Dividend Determination 2 2.4 Dividend Factor 2 2.5 Dividend Factor Class 2 2.6 Dividend Framework 2 2.7 Divisible Surplus 2 2.8 Policies  2 2.9 Policy Factors  2 
 Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3 
3.1 Contribution Principle 3 3.2 Dividend Framework 3 3.3 Dividend Factors 3 
3.3.1 Projection of Experience 3 3.3.2 Dividend Factor Classes 4 3.3.3 Uniform Criteria 4 3.3.4 Dividend Factors for New Policies 4 
3.4 Policy Factors  4 3.5 Mortality, Morbidity, and Policy Termination 4 3.6 Investment Income 5 3.7 Policy Loans  5 3.8 Expense  5 
3.9 Reinsurance  5 
3.10 Tax  5 3.11 Stockholder Retention on Policies Orig inally Issued by a Stock Company 5 
3.12 Termination Dividends 6 3.13 Illustrated Dividends Not Subject to ASOP No. 24 6 
3.14 Documentation 6 3.15 Reliance on Data or Other In formation Supplied by Others 6 
 Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures 6 
4.1 Actuarial Report 6 4.2 Disclosures Concerning Proce ss of Dividend Determination 6 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 iiiAPPENDIXES  
 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 8 
Background 8 Current Practicies 9 
 Appendix 2—Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses 12 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 ivMarch 2006 
 
TO: Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Pe rsons Interested in Dividends for 
Individual Participating Life Insuran ce, Annuities, and Disability Insurance 
 
FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 
SUBJ: Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 15 
 
 
This booklet contains the final version of  the revision of ASOP No. 15, now titled Dividends for 
Individual Participating Life Insuran ce, Annuities, and Disability Insurance . 
  Background
 
 The ASB adopted the original ASOP No. 15, Dividend Determination for Participating 
Individual Life Insurance Polic ies and Annuity Contracts, in 1990 and revised it in 1997 to 
exclude dividend illustrations that  are subject to or represented as being in accordance with the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ Life Insurance Illustrations Model 
Regulation . 
 
This current revision of ASOP No. 15, now titled  Dividends for Individua l Participating Life 
Insurance, Annuities, and Disability Insurance , was prepared by the Task Force to Revise ASOP 
No. 15 of the Life Committee of the ASB to be consistent with the current ASOP format, to 
bring individual disability insurance into its sc ope, and to reflect cu rrent, generally accepted 
actuarial practices with respect to dividends for participating individual life insurance policies 
and annuity contracts. 
 
 Exposure Draft
 
 The exposure draft of this ASOP was issued  in March 2005 with a comment deadline of 
September 30, 2005. Fourteen comment letters, show ing thoughtful insight of the issues, were 
received and considered in developing the fina l ASOP. For a summary of the substantive issues 
contained in the exposure draft comment letter and the responses, please see appendix 2. 
 The most significant changes since th e exposure draft were as follows: 
 
1.   References to profession al services with respect to long-term care insurance were 
removed from section 1.2, Scope. References to long-term care were also removed from 
the title and other ar eas of the standard.  
 2.   Several definitions were modified  for improved clarity and consistency. 
 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 v3.  A sentence was added to section 3.1, Cont ribution Principle, to clarify that the 
contribution principle can be  applied annually or over an  extended period of time. 
 4.   Section 3.3.4, Dividend Factors for New Polic ies, was changed with respect to setting a 
dividend factor that differentiates between old and new policies, dropping the reference 
to setting such a factor on a conservative basis. 
 5.   Guidance with respect to reinsurance was added in new section 3.9, Reinsurance. 
 6. The discussion of the impact of policy lo ans was moved from section 3.6, Investment 
Income, to new section 3.7, Policy Loans. 
 7.    Current practice with respect to disabili ty income insurance in appendix 1 was clarified. 
  The Life Committee thanks all those who commented on the exposure draft. 
 The ASB voted in March  2006 to adopt this standard.  
  
Task Force to Revise ASOP No. 15 
 
Thomas A. Phillips, Chairperson 
Armand M. dePalo    Gary N. Peterson Phillip J. Grigg    Stephen N. Steinig Dale S. Hagstrom    
 
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
Robert G. Meilander, Chairperson 
Charles Carroll    Thomas A. Phillips Michael A. Cioffi    Allan W. Ryan Dale S. Hagstrom   Barry L. Shemin 
    
 
Actuarial Standards Board 
  Cecil D. Bykerk, Chairperson  William C. Cutlip 
  Godfrey Perrott 
Alan D. Ford William A. Reimert Robert S. Miccolis Lawrence J. Sher Lew H. Nathan Karen F. Terry  
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 1ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF  PRACTICE NO. 15  
 
 
DIVIDENDS FOR INDIVIDUAL PARTICIPATING  
LIFE INSURANCE, ANNUITIES, AND DISABILITY INSURANCE  
 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date  
 1.1 Purpose
—This actuarial standard of practice (A SOP) provides guidance to actuaries 
when performing professional services relating to the dividend framework and the 
determination and illustration of dividends for individual participating life insurance, 
annuities, and disability insurance, whether issued  by a stock, fraternal, or mutual insurer.  
 1.2 Scope
—This standard applies to actuaries wh en performing professional services in 
connection with the establishment or modi fication of the dividend framework and the 
determination and illustration of dividends for individual participating life insurance, 
annuities, and disability insurance, includ ing any attached par ticipating riders and 
agreements.  
 
This standard does not apply to actuaries wh en performing profe ssional services with 
respect to illustrations of di vidends subject to ASOP No. 24,  Compliance with the NAIC 
Life Insurance Illustra tions Model Regulation . 
 
This standard does not apply to the establishm ent of the aggregate amount available to be 
distributed to policyholders as di vidends (i.e., divisible surplus).  
 
If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority), or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4. 
 1.3 Cross References
—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the original ly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date
—This standard is effective for actuari al services performed on or after 
August 1, 2006.  
 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 2Section 2.  Definitions  
 The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice. 
 2.1 Actual Experience
—Historical results within a dividend factor class and trends in those 
results. 
 2.2 Contribution Principle
—The concept that aggregate divi sible surplus is allocated to 
policies to reflect the proportion th at the policies, as part of their dividend factor classes, 
are considered to have contributed to divisible surplus. 
 2.3 Dividend Determination
—Given the dividend framewor k, the process by which the 
divisible surplus is allocated to policies incl uding the determination of dividend factors.  
 2.4 Dividend Factor
—A value or set of values, other th an the policy factors, used in the 
determination of the dividend on a particular policy. A divi dend factor reflects the 
experience of the dividend factor class of po licies to which the part icular policy belongs. 
Examples of dividend factors include those related to mortality, morbidity, expense, 
investment income, policy terminat ion, tax, and experience premiums.  
 2.5 Dividend Factor Class
—A group of policies for which di vidends are determined by using 
the same value or set of values for a particular dividend factor.  
 2.6 Dividend Framework
—The structure by which the insurer allocates divisible surplus 
among participating policies. This includes th e assignment of policies to dividend factor 
classes, the method of allocating income and costs, and th e structure of the formulas or 
other methods of using dividend factors. 
 2.7 Divisible Surplus
—The aggregate amount available to be distributed to  policyholders as 
dividends. 
 2.8 Policies
—Individual participating policies and contracts for life insurance, disability 
insurance and annuities, and group certificates  for these same types of business that 
operate in substantially the same manner as individual participating policies and 
contracts. 
 2.9 Policy Factors
—Financial components of a policy ba sed on the guarantees or actuarial 
components underlying the policy. Examples of policy factors include cash values, 
reserves and their associated net premiums, gross premiums, policy loan interest rates, and the rates of interest, mortality, and morbidity used in calculating cash values or reserves. 
  
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 3Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices  
 
3.1 Contribution Principle —The actuary should use the contri bution principle in determining 
dividends unless, in the actuary’s professiona l judgment, a different basis is preferable, 
reasonable, and appropriate. The actuary may apply the contribution principle annually or 
over an extended period of time. Limitati ons of the dividend determination process 
require that practical considerations be refl ected in applying the contribution principle, 
and the actuary may recognize such consideratio ns in applying the contribution principle. 
The actuary may use approximations, simplif ied processes, or other adjustments 
considering relevant conditions and circumstan ces such as the size of a particular group 
of policies, the costs and practical difficulti es of making a dividend scale change, and the 
effect of the scale change  on individual dividends. 
 3.2 Dividend Framework
—When advising the insurer wi th respect to the dividend 
framework, the actuary should consider the foll owing:  (a) treatmen t of policies within 
the line of business that, in the actuary’s pr ofessional judgment, is  equitable; (b) the 
insurer’s marketing, financial, and other objec tives; (c) materiality ; (d) relevant policy 
provisions; and (e) pr actical limitations.  
 3.3 Dividend Factors
—The actuary should determine di vidend factors that allocate the 
divisible surplus within the insurer’s di vidend framework. The actuary should develop 
dividend factors based on an analysis of po licy factors and actual experience of the 
participating block for which dividends are being determined. However, when actual 
experience is not determinable, available, or  credible, the actuary should consider the 
experience and trends in experience of simila r classes of business either from the same 
insurer, from industry sources, or from ot her non-industry sources,  in that order of 
preference. Dividend factors may differ from act ual experience, as the actuary may adjust 
the factors to reflect the insurer’s financial objectives, to reflect practical limitations, and 
to result in an estimated aggregate divi dend payout equal to divisible surplus.  
 
The actuary should consider materiality and practical limitations in determining the 
policy and dividend factors that are to appear  in the dividend formula or other method of 
using dividend factors. Thus, the analysis underlying dividend determination may involve 
the use a variety of policy factors and actua l experience measures, but the actuary need 
not include all of these factors.  
 When developing new dividend factors for all policies is not practical, the actuary may 
recommend the continuation of a dividend scale, continuation of certain dividend factors, 
or the use of approximations or simplified processes or formulas. 
  3.3.1 Projection of Experience
—If any projection of experien ce is made in determining 
the dividend factor of any dividend fact or class, the actuary should project 
experience for all classes of that dividend f actor for a line of business to the same 
point in time. The actuary should limit such  projections to a re latively short time 
frame (for example, the period for whic h a dividend scale is likely to remain 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 4appropriate) and should develop projecti ons consistently fo r dividends on both 
policies in force and new business.  
 
3.3.2 Dividend Factor Classes —When providing advice wi th respect to creating, 
changing, or combining dividend factor classes, the actuary should consider 
characteristics such as the following: 
 
a. the similarity of the policy types; 
 
b. the structure of the policy factors; 
 
c.  the similarity of the actual experience; 
 
d.  the time period over which the policies were issued; and  
 
e.  the underwriting and marketing of the policies.  
 
The actuary may use the same dividend f actor class for polic ies with different 
actual experience when this difference is charged for elsewhere. For example, the 
dividend factor related to mortality us ed for permanent policies resulting from 
term conversion may be the same as that for regularly underwritten policies, even though the actual experience is different, pr ovided that the appropriate charges for 
material differences in mortality experi ence, net of expense savings, are charged 
to the term policies.  
  3.3.3 Uniform Criteria
—In placing policies in their respective dividend factor classes, 
the actuary should base placement on uniform ly applied criteria such as criteria 
designed to group similar expe rience. The actual occurren ce or absence of a claim 
on a particular policy should not be a crit erion for placement of that policy in a 
particular dividend factor class.  
  3.3.4 Dividend Factors for New Policies
—Dividend factors for new policies or 
products commonly differ from those of ol der, otherwise similar policies. When 
setting dividend factors that  differ for otherwise simila r old and new policies, the 
actuary should consider (a) actual experi ence, if available, and (b) assumptions 
that are reasonable and methods that are equitable, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment.  
 
3.4 Policy Factors —In the calculation of di vidends for a particular  policy, the actuary may 
use the actual policy factors for that policy or  approximations to the actual policy factors 
that the actuary judges appropriate. 
 3.5 Mortality, Morbidity, and Policy Termination
—The actuary may base the dividend 
factors related to mortality, morbidity, or policy termination on a variety of characteristics or a combination thereof. Exampl es of such characteristics include, but are 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 5not limited to, age, gender, duration, geograp hic location, marketing method, plan, size of 
policy, and risk class.  
 3.6 Investment Income
—The actuary should reflect the invest ment experience of the line of 
business for which dividends are being determin ed in setting a dividend factor related to 
investment income. The dividend factor re lated to investment income may reflect 
investment experience net of investment expe nses or, alternatively, investment expenses 
may be treated separately as expenses. Th e actuary should consider the treatment of 
capital gains and losses and taxes in set ting the factor. The actuary should use a 
reasonable basis for allocating investment in come to policies, whether using portfolio, 
segmentation, investment genera tion, or any other methods.  
 3.7 Policy Loans
—The actuary may reflect the effect of policy loans in setting a dividend 
factor related to investment income. In determining the effect of policy loans, the actuary should consider the policy loan interest rate, the treatment of policy loan expenses, and 
whether policy loan interest is aggregated with other inve stment income recognizing the 
utilization rate of loanable f unds or whether policy loan intere st is passed through directly 
to borrowing policyholders. 
 3.8 Expense
—The actuary should consider expense e xperience in setting a dividend factor 
related to expenses. In  considering expense experience, th e actuary should allocate direct 
costs (those that can be related to a specific group of policies) to the policies generating 
those costs. The actuary should reasonably allo cate indirect costs, such as overhead. The 
actuary should develop dividend factor classes and dividend factors related to expenses 
such that total expenses charge d to each class are reasonable.  
 
3.9 Reinsurance —The actuary should review the natu re of any applicable reinsurance 
arrangement and determine the allocation, if any, of the impact (positive or negative) of reinsurance to specific blocks of business. If  a reinsurance agreement is reflected in the 
determination of dividends, the actuary may refl ect its impact in the dividend factors such 
as those related to expenses or mortalit y, or elsewhere in the dividend framework. 
 3.10 Tax
—The actuary may determine a dividend fact or related to taxes without reflecting 
modest variations in taxes among jurisdictions. Th e actuary should consider material 
variations in applicable laws in determining a dividend factor related to taxes, consistent 
with the analyses underl ying other experience.  
 3.11 Stockholder Retention on Policies Or iginally Issued by a Stock Company
—The actuary 
should consider applicable state law with re spect to stockholder retention charges on 
participating policies. The actuary should not ordinarily change the dividend factors for 
stockholder retention from those in the scale us ed in the original dividend illustrations. If 
the factors are to be changed from the scale used in the original dividend illustrations, the actuary should make corresponding changes to  all participating po licies in force.  
 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 63.12 Termination Dividends —In establishing or changing term ination dividends (dividends 
that may be provided upon events such as death, maturity or surrender), the actuary 
should consider the insurer’s intent as repr esented to the actuary by the insurer for the 
block of business, if available,  and develop termination divide nds that are consistent with 
that intent and supportable with in the divisible surplus of th e insurer. The actuary should 
consider applicable state law with respect to termination dividends.  
 3.13 Illustrated Dividends No t Subject to ASOP No. 24
—The actuary should determine 
dividends to be used in illustrations not s ubject to ASOP No. 24 so  that they reasonably 
relate to actual dividends recently determ ined for payment on policies in force. 
 
 The actuary should consider whether illust rated dividends can be supported by recent 
experience. If not, the actuary should disclose  this and consider the appropriateness of 
recommending a reduced scale for illustrations.  
 3.14 Documentation
—The actuary should prepare and retain documentation in compliance 
with the requirements of ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications . The actuary should 
also prepare and retain documentation to de monstrate compliance with the disclosure 
requirements of section 4.2.  
 3.15 Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others
—When relying on data or 
other information supplied by others, the actuary should refe r to ASOP No. 23, Data 
Quality , for guidance. 
  
Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures
 
 
4.1 Actuarial Report —When advising an insurer on divide nds subject to this standard of 
practice, or on the dividend framework, the ac tuary should issue an actuarial report in 
accordance with ASOP No. 41 to the insurer st ating the actuary’s advice, unless another 
actuary advising the same insurer is issuing such an actuarial report that incorporates such advice.  
 4.2 Disclosures Concerning Pro cess of Dividend Determination
—The actuary should 
disclose the following items in appropria te detail in the actuarial report: 
 
a.  a description of the process and divi dend framework used to determine dividends, 
the manner in which the policy and divide nd factors were reflected in that 
process, and any material change in pro cess or dividend framew ork since the last 
dividend scale; 
 
b. whether the contribution principle has been  followed and, if not, the basis used for 
dividend allocation; 
 c. if the contribution principle is being appl ied to divisible surp lus for a period other 
than the current year, the procedur es used for such application;  
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 7d. a description of the use of any significant approximations, simplified procedures, 
and practical adjustments to dividends,  and the rationale for that usage;  
 
e. a description of the divide nd factor classes used and a ny material changes in such 
classes or in placement of policies within them; 
 
f. a description of th e policy factors and any material change in practice with respect 
to their determination or use; 
 
g. a description of the divide nd factor values used and a ny material changes in such 
values, including an identification of di vidend factors with more than one 
dividend factor class. If a projection of experience has been used in setting a 
dividend factor, the type and exte nt of usage should be stated; 
 
h. a description of the approach used for a llocating investment income to the policies 
covered by the report. If the approach for a given group of policies has changed, 
or if a previously unused approach is to be introduced for a new group of policies, 
the report should identify the approach a nd include a full description of the nature, 
rationale, and effect of such approach; 
 
i. for the dividend factors related to stoc kholder retention, a description of the 
method, the actual factors, a nd any material changes in values of these factors 
since the last dividend scale change; 
 
j. if the insurer provides for termination dividends, a description of the processes 
used to determine termination dividends and any material changes in practice with 
respect to the determination of termination dividends since the last report;  
 
k. for illustrations that are not included in the scope of ASOP No. 24, a description 
of the methods used to determine illustrated dividends;   
l. a description of any illustrated divide nds that cannot be supported by recent 
experience; 
 
m. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, secti on 4.2, if any material assumption or method 
was prescribed by applicable law (statute s, regulations, and other legally binding 
authority); 
 n. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility for any material assumption or method selected by a party other than the actuary; and 
 o. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, secti on 4.4, if, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has othe rwise deviated materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP. 
 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 8Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
Note:   This appendix is provided fo r informational purposes but is not part of the standard of 
practice.  
 
Background
 
 The determination of dividends on participating lif e insurance policies was a fundamental part of 
actuarial practice in the United States before th e founding of actuarial or ganizations. Principles 
were defined early and have not changed. Practices have changed. Broad averaging of 
experience was generally used unt il the early 1970s. Because of newly emerging products with 
differentiated pricing, newly emer ging differences in experience f actors, and increased computer 
speed and capacity, dividend practices shifted to ward more refined reflections of cost and 
income.   There have been no fundamental changes in lif e insurance dividend practices since the 1980s. 
The general trend in practice has been to develo p refinements in classes of business. This has 
paralleled the development of dividend framewor ks that are more refine d and computer systems 
that are capable of handling the additional refinements.   The determination of dividends for disability insu rance policies has a shorter history than that for 
life insurance, but the principles are similar.  
One trend of the 1990s was the development of clos ed blocks of participating business, usually 
as a result of the demutualization of mutual life insurance companies. These closed blocks, 
according to their operating rules, are self-s upporting and preserve the reasonable dividend 
expectations of their policyholders. The determina tion of dividends for policies in closed blocks 
follows the principles outlined in this ASOP. The divisible surplus for the closed block is set so 
as to exhaust the assets when the last policy term inates, while avoiding the creation of a tontine.  
  Some insurers have sold blocks  of participating individual polic ies to a reinsurer. In such a 
situation, the guidance provided by this standard applies to any actuaries providing professional 
services, as defined in this standard, to an insurer with respect to those policies. 
 In 1976, the Society of Actuaries appointed a Committee on Dividend Philosophy to consider 
this subject. Building on the work and recomm endations of that committee, the American 
Academy of Actuaries’ (Academy) Committee on Dividend Principles and Practices formulated 
a set of Recommendations  for the participating individual life insurance business of mutual 
companies that was adopted by the Board of Directors of the Academy in 1980. In 1985, the 
Academy board adopted a revised set of Recommendations  that covered part icipating individual 
life insurance and participating annuity contracts of both mutu al and stock companies. The 
original ASOP No. 15, Dividend Determination for Particip ating Individual Life Insurance 
Policies and Annuity Contracts , was a reformatted version of those Recommendations . This 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 9revision has been updated to reflect current dividend determination practices and to add 
individual disability in surance to its scope.  
  
Current Practices
 
 The actuary may provide professiona l services in two principal ar eas with respect to dividends. 
The actuary is normally involved in the determ ination of dividends, using the dividend  
framework of the insurer. In a ddition, the actuary may be involve d in advising the insurer with 
respect to the dividend framework. In providing su ch services, current practices, such as the 
following, provide a background fo r dividend determination.  
 For typical insurers, management recommends an aggregate amount available to be distributed to 
policyholders as dividends (i.e., divisible surplu s), actuaries recommend an allocation of that 
amount to individual policies, and the board approves the entire process. Divisible surplus may 
be determined for the organization as a whole or may be determined for specific lines of business 
within the organization, including closed blocks or participating lines of business operated by 
stock life insurers. Also, some insurers have developed policies that are participating but upon 
which dividends are not anticipated to be paid. Fo r these policies, the insurer determines whether 
there is any divisible surplus to be allocated  to the policies in the line of business.  
 Dividends may be calculated for a company as a whole but it is more co mmon that dividends are 
calculated on a “line of business” basis. For this purpose, “line of  business” varies by company.  
Some companies may view the entire individua l life block as a single line of business while 
others may break that down into two or more separate lines. For dividend purposes, disability 
insurance is often treated as a separate line. A nnuity business is also of ten separated from other 
lines for dividend purposes.
 
 
The use of the contribution principle in determin ing dividends is generally accepted practice in 
the United States. Methods of applying the cont ribution principle in dividend determination 
described in actuarial literature include the following:  1. the contribution or source of earnings method;  2.  the asset share method;   3.  the fund method;  4.  the experience premium method;  5.  the percentage of premium method; and  6.  the reversionary bonus method.  Some of these methods, such as the percenta ge of premium method, refer primarily to the 
formula used to calculate dividends. Other methods, such as the asset share method, refer 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 10primarily to the process used. Much of the st andard is implicitly written in terms of the 
contribution method, but the standard should be understood in terms of analogous effects under 
the other methods.  It is the application of a particular method, by means of the dividend factors, that determines 
whether or not it follows the contribution principl e, not the method itself. Also, it may be that a 
particular method, which does not of itself satisf y the contribution principle, will do so when 
termination dividends (see section 3.12) are taken into account.  
 Frequently the calculation of divi dend factors takes place at two le vels. At the detail level (policy 
form, issue age, issue year, gender, etc.) the actuar y seeks a formula that is simple to administer 
while producing equitable dividends. A very co mmon formula is the three-factor dividend 
formula with a dividend factor related to invest ment, a dividend factor related to mortality, and a 
dividend factor for all other sources (primarily  expenses). After the actuary has selected a 
formula that the actuary thinks is appropriate, the actuary tests it at a model level (quinquennial 
issue ages, major policy forms, selected issue years,  etc.), using assets sh are calculations with a 
complete set of assumptions. The testing determ ines whether the selected scale is (in the 
actuary’s professional judgment ) reasonable and equitable. Th e dividend factors may reflect 
experience directly in one or more  of the three factors, but more often experience is reflected in 
the asset share assumptions.   A simplified approach to the determination of di vidends for disability policies is common for 
several reasons. It is more difficult to know claim costs with certainty becau se of the volatility of 
morbidity results. The product offerings in thes e areas tend to be qu ite complex, with many 
potential dividend factor  classes. An approach for thes e products may include a simplified 
formula for paying dividends, such as a percen tage of premium or an experience premium 
determined from underlying experience, and a br oad application of the definition of dividend 
factor class.   As stated in section 3.2 of the standard, practical limitations ar e part of the dividend framework. 
In determining dividends, actua ries commonly make adjustments to dividends for a variety of 
reasons, such as the following:  1.  to reflect unusual gain s or losses on certain supp lementary benefit riders; 
 2.  to reflect losses from the pres ence of settlement option guarantees; 
 3.  to smooth the transition from one dividend scale to another;  4.  to provide consistency in quantity disc ounts made to varying degrees in the gross 
premium structure; 
 5.  to serve as a balancing item so that a ggregate dividends equal aggregate divisible  
surplus; 
 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 116.  to distribute gains from ex traneous sources such as nonpartic ipating benefits or lines of 
business; and  
 7.  to smooth the incidence of dividends within a dividend scale by policy duration. 
 Determination of dividends require s analysis of the actual experi ence of the participating block 
for which the dividends are being determined. Ma intaining distinct accounting for participating 
business and for nonparticipating business and by line within each of these businesses may be 
helpful for this purpose.  In allocating divisible surplus to policies, a wi de variety of acceptable practice exists in the 
determination of dividend factors and the tr eatment of dividend factors in the dividend 
framework. The actual experien ce upon which dividend factors are based commonly varies by 
several characteristics. For example, expenses  may vary by plan, size of policy, marketing 
method, level of policyholder serv ice, and other items. Also, deta ils of taxation vary widely, 
depending on applicable laws in various jurisd ictions. Differences in dividend frameworks are 
also common among insurers. Dividends may be calculated on a pre-tax basis or the dividend 
framework may include a dividend factor related to taxes. Some  products of some insurers 
provide for termination dividends  and there is a wide variety of practices with respect to 
termination dividends.   Where an insurer is operating a closed block of participating policie s under operating rules 
developed in a demutualization, the insurer conti nues to set the divisible surplus for the partici-
pating policies, while the actua ry continues to use the dividend framework to determine 
dividends for the policies based on the contribu tion principle, as defined in the standard. 
However, as described in ASOP No. 33, Actuarial  Responsibilities with Respect to Closed 
Blocks in Mutual Life Insurance Company Conversions , aggregate dividends in a closed block 
are to be managed so as to exhaust the assets when the last policy term inates, while avoiding the 
creation of a tontine. In such  situations, actuaries  commonly include in dividend work an 
evaluation of the financial position of the closed block relative to the principle of exhausting the 
assets while avoiding a tontine. Also, as the operating rules for th e closed block may refer to one 
or more dividend factors, actuari es commonly refer to the operati ng rules for the closed block in 
setting the dividend factors.  The actuary may have responsibilities in addi tion to the requirements of this ASOP. For 
example, the Exhibit 5 Interroga tories of the National Associat ion of Insurance Commissioners’ 
current annual statement address additional issues with respect to the determination of dividends 
(see section 3.13 of th is standard).  
 
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 12Appendix 2 
 
Comments on the Exposure Draft and Responses 
 
 The exposure draft of this actuarial sta ndard of practice (ASOP), then titled Dividends for 
Individual Participating Life In surance, Annuities, Disability Insurance, and Long-Term Care 
Insurance,  was issued in March 2005, with a comme nt deadline of September 30, 2005. Fourteen 
comment letters were received, some of whic h were submitted on behalf of multiple comment-
ators, such as by firms or committees. For pur poses of this appendix, the term “commentator” 
may refer to more than one person associated wi th a particular comment letter. The Task Force 
to Revise ASOP No. 15 carefully considered all comments received, and the Life Committee and 
the ASB reviewed (and modified, where appropr iate) the proposed changes to the ASOP. 
Summarized below are the signifi cant issues and questions contai ned in the comment letters and 
responses to each. The term “reviewers” includes the task force, the Life Committee, and the 
ASB. Unless otherwise noted, the section numbers and titles used  below refer to those in the 
exposure draft.  
 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS  
Comment 
  
Response Several commentators suggested various editorial changes in addition to those addressed specifically 
below.  
The reviewers implemented such chan ges if they enhanced clarity and did not alter the intent of the 
section. 
Comment  
 
 Response One commentator noted that if interest earned is less than required, there may be yearly dividend decreases 
and policyholder complaints. The commentator suggested that it may be better to level scales, build 
surplus, and develop dividends with an increasing pattern.  
 The reviewers noted that the development of such scales is a determination of divisible surplus, which is a 
decision by the insurer and not within the scope of the standard. 
Comment 
  
Response Two commentators suggested that the cost of reinsurance might be taken into account in the distribution of 
costs among policyholders.  
The reviewers agreed and created new section 3.9, Reinsurance.  
Comment 
  
 
Response Some disability income policies have been issued as participating but where no dividend is anticipated to 
be paid. One commentator suggested the standard address (a) whether it is appropriate to offer such policies under the contribution principle, and (b) how the actuary is to determine dividends.  
 
The reviewers believed determining the appropriateness of policy offerings was beyond the scope of this 
standard. The reviewers disagreed with the commentator’s request that the standard discuss how to 
determine dividends. 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator noted that some blocks of individual participating insurance have been sold to a 
reinsurer and asked about the scope of the standard in such a situation. 
 
The reviewers noted that the standard applies to actuaries providing professional services on dividends whether working for a direct insurer or a reinsurer.  
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 13 
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator noted that, in the case of a closed block of participating policies, one or more dividend 
factors, such as the factor related to expenses, may be specifically addressed in a plan of reorganization. 
The commentator suggested the standard should provide guidance in this situation. 
 The reviewers noted that the scope of the standard  recognized that the actuary should satisfy the 
requirements of “other legally binding aut hority” in performing professional services.  
Comment 
  
Response Several commentators believed that the distinction in guidance for paid dividends and illustrated dividends 
was unclear.  
The reviewers assessed the scopes of ASOP Nos. 15 and 24 and believed they were clear. 
Comment 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Response Two commentators made comments that can be summarized in three general areas: 
 
1.  The standard should provide more guidance to actuaries in the area of the actuary’s responsibility to act 
in the beneficial interest of the policyholder in determining dividends and the latitude the actuary may have in following the contribution principle. 
 
2.  The standard did not provide sufficient detail in the level of guidance for performing professional services, both in the dividend framework and determining dividend factors. 
 
3.  The standard should address the role of the actuary, the insurer, and the policyholder in determining divisible surplus. 
 
1.  The reviewers assessed the standard with respect to  the actuary’s responsibility to act in the beneficial 
interest of the policyholder and the latitude the actuary may exercise in following the contribution 
principle and believed the standard provided appr opriate guidance and reflected accepted practice. 
 2.  The reviewers assessed the level of  detail and made appropriate revisions. 
 
3.  The reviewers noted that determining divisible surplus was
 outside the scope of the  standard.  
Comment 
 
 Response Several commentators stated that the determination of dividends for participating long-term care policies 
does not yet have generally accepted practices and should be outside the scope of this standard. 
 The reviewers agreed and removed references to long-term care policies. 
SECTION 1. PURPOSE, SCOPE, CROSS REFENCES, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
Section 1.1, Purpose 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that the standard should clearly state that  it covers policyholder dividends 
whether the policy is issued by a stock, fraternal, or mutual insurer. 
 The reviewers agreed and revised the language  in this section to include these entities. 
Section 1.2, Scope 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator asserted that the actual payment of future dividend scales should be tightly and 
permanently linked to those illustrated at issue. 
 The reviewers believed that the standard adequately addressed the dividend allocation process and that the 
insurer may change the dividend allocation process, working through the dividend framework, dividend 
factors, and divisible surplus, resulting in dividend scales that may differ markedly from those originally illustrated. 
SECTION 2.  DEFINITIONS 
Comment 
 
 
Response A few commentators asked for more clarity in the definitions of 2.3, Dividend Determination; 2.4, 
Dividend Factor; 2.6, Dividend Framework; and 2.8, Policy Factors (now 2.9). 
 
The reviewers agreed and amended the definitions.  
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 14 
Section 2.2, Contribution Principle 
Comment 
 
 
 Response Some commentators suggested that the definition of contribution principle should clarify the point that 
policies are grouped into dividend factor classes for the purpose of determining dividends and that the 
distribution of surplus among policies is based on such factor classes. 
 The reviewers agreed that such clarity is important and changed the definition of the contribution 
principle.
  
Comment 
  
Response One commentator asked for clarification of the change  in the definition of “contribution principle” because 
the commentator believed this suggeste d no difference from current practice. 
 
The reviewers added the word “refl ects” to acknowledge the impossibility of distributing divisible surplus 
to policies literally in exact proportion to the contribution to divisible surplus. 
Section 2.4, Dividend Factor 
Comment  
Response One commentator suggested that the defin ition be clarified to reflect experience. 
 
The reviewers agreed and modified the definition.
 
Section 2.7, Policies 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator suggested that the definition of “po licy” with respect to group certificates should be 
clarified to cover group certificates that include dividend provisions similar to individual participating policies. 
 
The reviewers agreed and changed the definition to better reflect that concept. 
SECTION 3.  ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Section 3.1, Contribution Principle 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that the re ference to the contribution principl e being applied over an extended 
period of time be transferred from the appendix to section 3.1, where it was in the previous standard.  
 The reviewers agreed and restored this reference to section 3.1. 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that the contribution principle should include smoothing out and leveling 
variations in factors, such as mortality, to avoid anomalies in the progression of dividends by duration. 
 The reviewers agreed but believed that the standard adequately covered this. 
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator noted that some dividend frameworks may provide for a step-up in premium that may 
be offset by a dividend. The commentator asked whether the contribution principle is being followed in 
that situation.  
The reviewers noted that the standard provides for approximations, simplified processes, or other 
adjustments considering relevant conditions and circumstances. Such latitude is intended to allow for a variety of reasonable practices in fo llowing the contribution principle. 
Section 3.3, Dividend Factors 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator suggested that the list of reasons for making adjustments to dividends or dividend 
factors, which was in appendix 1 of the exposure draft, be moved to the end of this section or be cross referenced.  
 
The reviewers believed the list of r easons represented current practice and was more appropriate in the 
appendix as education. The reviewers changed the wording of the appendix to refer to section 3.2.  
Section 3.3.2, Differences between Dividend Factor Classes (now Dividend Factor Classes) 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that the ch aracteristics to be considered in de fining dividend factor classes be 
expanded, by making clear that those in the st andard are examples, not an exclusive list. 
 
The reviewers agreed but believed that the ex isting language allowed consideration of other 
characteristics.  
ASOP No. 15—March 2006  
 15 
Section 3.3.3, Uniform Criteria 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested a slight editing of the stat ement in the draft concer ning uniform criteria.  
 
The reviewers agreed and revised the language.  
Section 3.3.4, Dividend Factors for New Policies 
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator suggested that, when setting a dividend factor that differentiates between old and new 
policies, it may not be appropriate to set that dividend factor on a conservative basis given a fixed distributable surplus. 
 
The reviewers agreed and revised section 3.3.4. 
Section 3.5, Morta lity, Morbidity, and Policy Termination 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested it be made clearer that the list of examples in this section is not exclusive. 
 
The reviewers agreed and added the appropriate wording.   
Section 3.8, Tax (now section 3.10) 
Comment  
 
Response  One commentator suggested that generally accepted prac tice allows dividend form ulas determined on a 
pre-tax basis with no deduction for taxes and that the standard should make that clear. 
 
The reviewers agreed but believed th e standard adequately covered this.
  
Section 3.9, Stockholder Retention on Policies Origin ally Issued by a Stock Company (now section 3.11) 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that determ ination of shareholder retention as  discussed in this section is a 
part of the determination of divisible surplus and therefore not covered by this standard.  
 
The reviewers believed that shareholder retention charges, as they relate to the dividend framework, were appropriately addressed in  the revised standard.
  
Section 3.11, Illustrated Dividends Not Subj ect to ASOP No. 24 (now section 3.13) 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested that the standard clarify that illustrated dividends not covered by ASOP  
No. 24 should reasonably relate to recent paid dividends, not all past dividends paid.  
 The reviewers agreed and amended this section to reflect that.  
APPENDIX (now Appendix 1) 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator took exception to including experience premium method and percentage of premium 
method as involving simplified formulas. 
 
The reviewers made a clarifying revision to the sentence to address the commentator’s concern. 
 
 
   
 
 
Actuarial Standard  
of Practice  
No. 54 
 
     
Pricing of Life Insuranc e and Annuity Products 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
Developed by the 
Life Insurance and Annuity Pricing Task Force 
of the Life Committee of the  
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
 
Adopted by the 
Actuarial Standards Board 
June 2018 
 
Doc. No. 193 
  

 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
ii  
T A B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S 
 
 Transmittal Memo iv  Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 1  
1.1 Purpose 1  
1.2 Scope 1  
1.3 Cross References 2  
1.4 Effective Date 2  
 Section 2.  Definitions 2  
2.1 Modeling Cell 2  
2.2 Pricing 2  
2.3 Profitability Analysis 2  
2.4 Profitability Metric 2  
2.5 Risk Capital 3  
2.6 Sensitivity Analysis 3  
2.7 Stochastic Analysis 3  
 Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 3  
3.1 Initial Pricing Considerations 3  
3.1.1 Criteria of the Actuary’s Principal 3  
3.1.2 Relevant Characteristics of the Product 3  
3.2 Selecting Profitability Metrics 4  
3.2.1
 Profitability Metrics  4 
3.2.2  Considerations When Selecting a Profitability Metric  4 
3.3 Developing or Selecting the Model 5  
3.4 Pricing Assumptions 6  
3.4.1 Historical Experience Used When Setting Assumptions 6  
3.4.1.1  Assumptions Based on Releva nt and Credible Data 6  
3.4.1.2  Assumptions Based on Historical Experience 6  
3.4.1.3  Assumptions When There is No Re levant Historical Experience 6  
3.4.2  Assumption Margins  6 
3.4.3  Consistency of Assumptions  7 
3.4.4  Assumption Setting  7 
3.4.5  Capital Market Assumptions  8 
3.4.6  Documentation of Assumptions, Ra tionale, and Data Modifications  8 
3.5 Risk Evaluation 8  
3.5.1  Sensitivity Analysis  8 
3.5.2  Stochastic Analysis  8 
3.6 Governance and Controls 9  
3.7 Reliance on Data or Other Info rmation Supplied by Others 9  
3.8 Reliance on Assumptions Provided by Others 9  
3.9 Documentation 9  
 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
iii Section 4.  Communicati ons and Disclosures 9  
4.1 Actuarial Communications 9  
4.2 Additional Disclosures 10  
 
APPENDIXES 
Appendix 1—Background and Current Practices 11  
Background 11  
Current Practices 12  
 Appendix 2—Comments on the Second Exposure Draft and Responses 13  
  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
iv June 2018 
 TO:  Members of Actuarial Organizations Gove rned by the Standards of Practice of the 
Actuarial Standards Board and Other Persons  Interested in th e Pricing of Life 
Insurance and Annuity Products 
 FROM:  Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) 
 SUBJ:   Actuarial Standard of Practice (ASOP) No. 54, Pricing of Life Insurance and 
Annuity Products  
 
 This document is the fina l version of ASOP No. 54, Pricing of Life Insurance and Annuity 
Products .  
 History of the Standard 
 The ASB periodically reviews th e completeness of ASOPs for al l practice areas and asked the 
Life Committee to consider wh ether an ASOP addressing life insurance and annuity pricing 
principles would be appropriate. In October 2014,  the ASB Life Committee distributed a Request 
for Comments regarding an AS OP focused on life insurance and annuity pricing. Sixteen 
comment letters were received. Mo st of the comments supported th e drafting of such an ASOP.  
 The pricing of products is one of the most importa nt functions actuaries perform. Therefore, the 
ASB Life Committee believes that the professi on would be well served by an ASOP providing 
guidance regarding life insuranc e and annuity product pricing. Th e ASB agreed and approved the 
creation of an exposure draft. 
 First Exposure Draft 
 In March 2016, the ASB approved an exposure draft of this proposed ASOP. Seventeen comment letters were received and considered in making changes that were reflected in the 
second exposure draft.  Second Exposure Draft 
 In June 2017, the ASB approved a second exposure dr aft with a comment deadline of October 31, 
2017. Six comment letters were received and consid ered in making changes that are reflected in 
this final ASOP.  The ASB thanks all those who made co mments on each of the exposure drafts.  
 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
v Notable Changes from the Second Exposure Draft 
 
Notable changes from the second exposure draft in  response to the comment  letters include the 
following:  1. The fifth paragraph of section 1.2 was clarif ied by adding the following: “To the extent 
that a product does not clearly fall into th e scope just described, the actuary should use 
professional judgment to determine wh ether the product is in scope.”   
 
2. An example was added to the sixth paragrap h of section 1.2 to cl arify that the ASOP 
would apply in the case of a product written on an individual policy form that offers both 
a death benefit and a long-term care benefit.  
 3. A seventh paragraph was added to section 1.2 to  clarify that the standard “does not apply 
to actuaries when performing act uarial services with  respect to the pricing of reinsurance 
contracts.”  
4. The definition of pricing in section 2.2 wa s revised by adding the phrase “including 
evaluating the product’s profitability and underlying risks” to the first sentence; 
 
5. Section 3.5.1, Cost of Capital, was remove d. The concept is now covered in section 
3.1.1(c). 
 
6. Several clarifying revisions were made to section 3.6, Governance and Controls. 
 
7. Guidance was added to section 4.1 to state that  the actuary should disc lose “the material 
results of any additional profitabili ty analysis that was performed.” 
  The ASB voted in June 2018 to adopt this standard.   
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
vi Life Insurance and Annuity Pricing Task Force 
 
David A. Brentlinger, Chairperson 
Jodi L. Kravitz  Steven L. Putterman  Lisa S. Kuklinski  Anthony J. Tokarz 
 
 
Life Committee of the ASB 
 
David A. Brentlinger, Chairperson 
Janice A. Duff   Henry W. Siegel  
   Lisa S. Kuklinski  Anthony J. Tokarz  
Linda M. Lankowski  Matthew J. Wininger John A. MacBain   
  
Actuarial Standards Board 
 
Beth E. Fitzgerald, Chairperson 
Christopher S. Carlson Darrell D. Knapp Maryellen J. Coggins  Cande J. Olsen Robert M. Damler   Kathleen A. Riley Mita D. Drazilov  Barbara L. Snyder 
   
 
             
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) sets st andards for appropriate ac tuarial practice  
in the United States through the developmen t and promulgation of Actuarial Standards of 
Practice (ASOPs). These ASOPs describe the procedures an actuary should follow when 
performing actuarial services and identify what the actuary should disclose when 
communicating the results of those services. 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
1  
PRICING OF LIFE INSURA NCE AND ANNUITY PRODUCTS 
 
STANDARD OF PRACTICE  
 
 
Section 1. Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 1.1 Purpose—This actuarial standard of pract ice (ASOP) provides guidance to actuaries 
when performing actuarial serv ices with respect to the pricing  of life insurance and 
annuity products, including riders attached to such products. Throughout the remainder of 
the ASOP, the use of the term “product” incl udes riders attached to life insurance and 
annuity products.   
1.2 Scope—This standard applies to actuaries when performi ng actuarial services with 
respect to the pricing  of life insurance and annuity produc ts when a product is initially 
developed or when charges or benef its are changed for future sales.  
 
This standard does not apply to any changes made on in-force policies. Such resetting of nonguaranteed elements, including dividends, on pr oducts in force is outside the scope of 
this ASOP and is addressed in ASOP No. 2, Nonguaranteed Charges or Benefits for Life 
Insurance Policies and Annuity Contracts , and No. 15,  Dividends for Individual 
Participating Life Insurance, Annuities, and Disability Insurance . The actuary should 
also refer to ASOP Nos. 2 or 15 when de termining nonguaranteed elements or dividends 
when a product is initially developed or when charges or benefits are changed for future 
sales.  
 
The standard does not include guidance on comp liance with federal antitrust laws or the 
evaluation of other considerations (such as marketing, sales, and competition) that may 
affect the ultimate price.  
 The standard applies to actuaries when pe rforming actuarial services related to life 
insurance and annuity products written on i ndividual policy forms and to group master 
contracts with individual certificates that are priced in a similar manner to products written on individua l life and annuity policy forms.  
 Products not priced in a similar manner to t hose written on individu al life and annuity 
policy forms or products that do not have materi al mortality or morbidity risk are not in 
scope. Two examples are trad itional group term life and certain retirement funding 
products (for example, synthetic guaranteed interest contracts). To the extent that a 
product does not clearly fall into the scope  just described, the actuary should use 
professional judgment to determine whether the product is in scope. 
 To the extent that the guidance in this st andard may conflict with guidance in other 
ASOPs regarding the pricing  of specific benefits other than  life and annuity benefits, the 
guidance in other ASOPs will govern the pricing  of such other specific benefits. For 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
2 example, the pricing  of a product that offers both a death benefit and a long-term care 
benefit written on an individua l policy form would be within the scope of this ASOP. 
However, to the extent that the guidance in th is standard conflicts with guidance in other 
ASOPs regarding the pricing  of the long-term care benefit,  the guidance in other ASOPs 
would govern the pricing  of such long-term care benefits.  
 This standard does not apply to actuaries when  performing actuarial services with respect 
to the pricing  of reinsurance contracts. 
 This standard does not apply to actuaries when  performing actuarial services with respect 
to illustrations of nonguaranteed charge s or benefits subject to ASOP No. 24, Compliance 
with the NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation .  
 If the actuary departs from the guidance set forth in this standard in order to comply with applicable law (statutes, regulations, and othe r legally binding authority) or for any other 
reason the actuary deems appropriate, th e actuary should refer to section 4.2. 
 
1.3 Cross References—When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as  they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever  name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the original ly referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
 1.4 Effective Date—This standard will be effectiv e for any actuarial services performed on or 
after December 1, 2018.  
 
Section 2. Definitions 
 
The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice. 
  2.1  Modeling Cell—Policies or contra cts that are treated in a model  as being completely 
alike with regard to, for example, demogr aphic characteristics, assumptions, policy 
provisions, and underwriting class. 
 2.2 Pricing—The process of determining charges for, and benefits provided by, an insurance 
policy or annuity contract at  issue, including evaluating the product’s profitability and 
underlying risks. Examples of charges includ e premiums, cost of insurance charges, 
separate account charges, surrender charges,  and policy fees. Examples of benefits 
include death benefits, surrender benefits, interest credits, dividends, and income 
benefits.  
  2.3 Profitability Analysis—An evaluation of a prod uct’s expected financial results using a set 
of assumptions, a specified model, and  specified profitability metric(s) . 
 2.4 Profitability Metric—A measurement used to assess a product’s expected level of 
financial results.  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
3   
2.5  Risk Capital—The amount of capital a co mpany chooses to hold to meet a business 
objective, given its risk profile. 
 2.6 Sensitivity Analysis—Analysis performed by changing an assumption or set of 
assumptions and comparing the results to th ose resulting from the baseline assumption(s). 
 2.7 Stochastic Analysis—Analysis performed usi ng a model that estimates distributions of 
potential outcomes by allowing random variati on in one or more inputs to the model. 
   
Section 3. Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 3.1 Initial Pricing Considera tions—When preparing for the pricing  exercise, the actuary 
should take into account the criteria of the actuary’s principal and the relevant 
characteristics of the product.  
 
3.1.1  Criteria of the Actuary’s Principal—Crite ria of the actuary’s principal, which are 
usually related to profitability and risk, include, but are not limited to, the 
following: 
 
a. the choice of profitability metrics ;  
 
b. targets for profitability metrics , including any special circumstances, 
such as targets for shorter periods of  time or situations where profits are 
expected to be followed by losses. Targ ets often are stated at an aggregate 
product level and may be stated at other levels as determined by the 
principal, such as at the modeling cell  level;  
 
c. the approach for incorporating the cost  of maintaining a defined level of 
risk capital  into the profitability analysis ; and 
 
d. how risk management policies of  the company relate to product pricing ; 
for example, how tolerant the actuary’s principal is to volatility in earnings 
and the balance sheet. 
 
3.1.2  Relevant Characteristics of the Prod uct—Relevant characteristics of the product 
include, but are not limite d to, the following: 
 
a. the intended design objectives of the product; 
 
b. the intended market, anticipated sales, and the competitive alternatives to 
the product; 
 
c. how the product will be sold, for example, underwriting, distribution, and 
marketing; 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
4  
d.  how the product will be administered, including any limitations in 
administrative and valuation systems that could impact product design or 
operational risks; 
 e.  potential risk mitigation strategi es such as reinsurance and hedging; 
 f.  applicable law (statutes, regulati ons, and other legally binding authority); 
and 
 g.  the tax treatment of the product as  it applies to both the owner and the 
insurer.  
 
3.2  Selecting Profitability Metrics—Th e actuary should select one or more profitability 
metrics in a manner consistent with the criter ia of the actuary’s principal and the 
underlying design and risk s of the product.  
 
3.2.1 Profitability Metrics—The actuary should consider using more than one 
profitability metric  when evaluating the expected  profitability and underlying 
risks. Examples of profitability metrics  include, but are not limited to, the 
following: 
 
a. the expected return on initial invested capital, often referred to as the 
internal rate of return;  
b. the average of expected future periodic returns on capital, often referred to 
as average return on equity; 
 c. a measure of profitability  expressed as a percenta ge of premium, often 
referred to as profit margin; 
 d. the present value of expected future pr ofits as a percentage of the present 
value of expected assets, often re ferred to as return on assets; 
 
e. the present value of expected future profits, often referred to as the value 
of new business; and 
 f. the time period when a measure of cumulative profits turns positive, often 
referred to as break-even year. 
 The actuary should use discount rates th at are appropriate for the selected 
profitability metric , where applicable. 
 3.2.2  Considerations When Selecting a Profitability Metric—When selecting a 
profitability metric , the actuary should c onsider the following: 
  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
5 a. the expected pattern of pr ofits over time (for exampl e, the pattern of gains 
and losses, however measured);  
b. the significance of the product’s underl ying risks (for example, the size 
and pattern of risk capital ); and 
 
c. any other considerations that the act uary determines are relevant (for 
example, limitations of the profitability metric  for the product being 
priced). 
 3.3 Developing or Selecting the Model—The act uary should develop or select the model  to 
support pricing in a manner consistent with the criteria of the actuary’s principal. The 
actuary should develop or select a model that accommodates the design of the product 
and the selected profitability metrics  and reasonably simulate s the future financial 
impact of the product. 
 
When developing or selecting the model, the actuary should consider the following: 
 
a. Time Horizon—the degree to which the model extends over a sufficient time 
period such that the profita bility results and underlyi ng risks of the product are 
adequately captured; 
 
b. Granularity—the degree to which the m odel accommodates the necessary detail 
of model components, such as time intervals, modeling cell  structure, and 
assumptions that vary by modeling cell ,  to appropriately represent the expected 
profitability and underlying ri sk of future sales;  
 
c. Dynamic Assumptions—the degree to which the model accommodates how 
certain assumptions, such as policy behavior assumptions, may vary based on 
other factors; 
 
d. Asset Returns—the degree to which the model accommodates asset returns 
consistent with how returns are expected to be recognized and allocated to the 
product; 
 e. Economic Scenarios—the degree to which the model accommodates, if 
appropriate, market consis tent or real world scenarios that represent an 
appropriate range of future economic conditions;  
 f. Accounting and Actuarial Bases—the de gree to which the model accommodates 
the accounting standards and practices (f or example, statutory, GAAP, and tax) 
and the assumptions and methods used to calculate reserves and other actuarial 
balances that underlie the profitability metrics  to be used in pricing ; 
 
g. Risk Capital Framework—the degree to which the model accommodates a risk 
capital  framework that is expected  to be used in practice; 
 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
6 h. Taxes—the degree to which the model accommodates a tax structure that is 
expected to apply, given the product, the tax position of the company, and the 
company’s tax allocation practices; 
 i. Risk Evaluation—the degree to which the model  accommodates an appropriate 
method to evaluate risks, as described in section 3.5; 
 
j. Risk Mitigation—the degree to which the model appropriately accommodates risk 
mitigation strategies that are expect ed to be used to support the product; 
 k. Model Validation—the degree to which the model  is sufficiently transparent to 
support validation, as descri bed in section 3.6; and 
 
l. any other items the actuary determin es are significant to the model. 
 
3.4  Pricing Assumptions—The actuary should us e professional judgment to set assumptions 
that are reasonable for the in tended purpose and reflect expect ed future experience based 
on the following considerations.  
 
3.4.1 Historical Experience Used When Sett ing Assumptions—The actuary should use 
professional judgment to ensure that releva nt historical experi ence is reflected 
when setting assumptions.   3.4.1.1 Assumptions Based on Relevant and Credible Data—The actuary should 
use assumptions based on relevant and credible data, such as company 
experience, industry expe rience, and other releva nt experience, which 
may be modified to reflec t any data deficiencies.  
 
3.4.1.2 Assumptions Based on Historical Experience—When using historical 
experience, the actuary should consid er whether there are reasons to 
expect that future experience will differ from past experience. 
 3.4.1.3 Assumptions When There Is No Relevant Historical Experience
—In 
some instances, no relevant histori cal experience is available to the 
actuary. In this situation, the actu ary should use prof essional judgment, 
considering available sources of data, when setting assumptions.  
 
3.4.2 Assumption Margins—The actuary shoul d consider the appropriateness of 
including a margin in the assumptions. When setting a margin, the actuary should 
consider the following:  
 
a. the degree to which there is uncerta inty around the assumptions due to 
lack of relevant, credible company or  industry experience data to support 
the assumptions;  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
7 b. whether the degree of uncer tainty may vary over different periods of time 
within the time horizon of the model; and  
c. whether the level of margins is appropriate for each assumption 
individually and in aggreg ate for all assumptions.  
 
3.4.3 Consistency of Assumptions—The actua ry should use assumptions that are 
internally consistent and reflect any interd ependencies with each  other, consistent 
with current and anticipated compa ny practices, and, where appropriate, 
consistent with similar assumptions used for other assignments within the 
company and its associated entities. 
 3.4.4 Assumption Setting—When setting assumpti ons, the actuary should consider the 
following:  
 a. sales mix assumptions that reflect th e anticipated distribution of sales 
across modeling cells ; 
 
b. investment assumptions and economic ma rket assumptions that reflect real 
world or market consistent theory, where appropriate, and that include 
assumptions for reinvestment, asset default, and investment expenses; 
 c. mortality and morbidity assumptions th at incorporate the effects of risk 
selection and classification of future applicants, the impact of expected 
trends on future assumptions, and produc t features such as conversion and 
level premium periods on term coverage;  
 d. for experience that is elective in nature, such as the policyholder’s ability 
to pay or not pay premiums, to receive  certain types of benefits, or to 
terminate the contract, assumptions that consider the causal variables impacting the policyholder’s behavi or, such as relevant policyholder 
characteristics (for example, age), policy or rider characteristics (for 
example, size of policy), tax treatment of the product as it applies to the 
owner, and the value of guaranteed bene fits driven by external factors (for 
example, the current interest rate environment and underlying market performance); 
 e. expense assumptions that reflect anticipa ted future trends in expenses (for 
example inflation or expense efficiencies). The actuary should consider the appropriateness of the basis (for  example, fully allocated, marginal) 
when developing expense assumptions; and  
f. the principal’s capacity and intent with regard to in-force management 
strategies, including the determination of nongua ranteed elements and 
dividends.
 
 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
8 The actuary should consider the extent to which certain  of these assumptions may 
also be influenced by the following:   1. product design;  2. the intended market and the competit ive alternatives to the product; and 
 3. how the product will be sold, for example, underwriting, distribution, and 
marketing. 
 
When setting assumptions in areas outside  the actuary’s area of expertise, the 
actuary should consider incorporating the views of experts. However, the actuary 
should set assumptions that reflect his or her professional judgment. 
 
3.4.5 Capital Market Assumptions—When analyzi ng the cost of a benefit that can be 
replicated using liquid capital market in struments, the actuary should consider 
comparing the cost of the be nefit using market consistent  assumptions to the price 
of a comparable investment guarantee obs erved in capital markets to assess how 
well the results of the analysis align with the profitability goals and risk management policy of the actuary’s principal.  
3.4.6 Documentation of Assumptions, Rationale , and Data Modifications—The actuary 
should document the assumptions, the rati onale behind the assumptions, and any 
modifications made to data sources. If margins are included in assumptions, the actuary should document the approach us ed and, where practicable, the margin 
component of each assumption.
  
 
In setting assumptions, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 25, Credibility Procedures , 
for guidance. 
 
3.5  Risk Evaluation—The actuary should evalua te the risks in the product when performing a 
profitability analysis .  
 
3.5.1 Sensitivity Analysis—The actuary should use sensitivity analysis  to evaluate the 
impact of deviations in assumptions on pr ofitability results a nd should consider 
performing more analysis for assumptions that have a significant impact on the 
profitability analysis  than for assumptions that have less impact.   
 3.5.2 Stochastic Analysis—The act uary should consider using stochastic analysis  to 
evaluate the distribution of the results of the profitability analysis from 
variations in key assumptions, in particular interest rate s and equity returns. When 
performing stochastic analysis , the actuary should evalua te the results of the 
profitability analysis not only in the aggregate but also for a selection of 
individual scenarios. 
 The actuary may consider other risk ev aluation techniques, as appropriate.  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
9  
The actuary should consider the impact of risk  mitigation strategies that are expected to 
be implemented at the product and company leve l and the expected effectiveness of those 
strategies.  
 3.6 Governance and Controls—The actuary should us e, or, if appropriate, may rely on others 
to use, reasonable governance and controls over the actuarial services provided as part of 
pricing . Examples of possible governance a nd controls include the following:  
 
a. effective oversight of methods  and assumptions used in pricing ;  
 b. preservation and protection of the model from unintentional or untested changes;  
 c. validation of the appropriate use of  the inputs in m odel calculations;  
 d. validation that values fr om the models are consistent with independent 
calculations of such values from outside the model; 
 e. validation that the model reasonably simulates the expected future financial 
impact of the product; and 
 f. review of assumptions a nd other aspects of the m odel by another knowledgeable 
person who conducts the revi ew in an objective way.  
  
The actuary should document the governance and controls used by the actuary as part of 
pricing . The actuary should disclose any relian ce on governance and c ontrols used by 
others. 
 3.7  Reliance on Data or Other Information Supplied by Others—When relying on data or 
other information supplied by others, the actuary should refe r to ASOP No. 23, Data 
Quality , for guidance. The actuary should disclo se the extent of any such reliance. 
 
3.8  Reliance on Assumptions Provided by Ot hers—When relying on assumptions provided 
by others, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications . The 
actuary should disclose the ex tent of any such reliance. 
 3.9 Documentation—The actuary should prepar e and retain documentation in accordance 
with ASOP No. 41.  
  
Section 4. Communications and Disclosures 
 
4.1 Actuarial Communications—When issuing any actuarial communicatio n relating to this 
ASOP, the actuary should refer to ASOP No. 41 . The actuary should consider the needs 
of the intended user in communicating the ac tuarial findings in any actuarial report. In 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
10 addition, in any actuari al report concerning pricing , the actuary should disclose the 
following, if practical and relevant:  
 
a. criteria of the actuary’s principa l, as described in section 3.1.1; 
 
b. relevant characteristics of the pr oduct, as described in section 3.1.2; 
 
c. the profitability metrics  used in the profitability analysis  and how these metrics 
are consistent with the criteria of the act uary’s principal, as described in section 
3.2;   
d. the considerations used to determine the model,  as described in section 3.3; 
 
e. material pricing assumptions and the ma nner in which the actuary established 
these assumptions to reflect expected futu re experience, adjusted to include any 
margin, as described in section 3.4;  
f. results of risk evaluation, as  described in section 3.5;  
 
g. any reliance on governance and controls us ed by others, as described in section 
3.6;  
 
h. any reliance on data or other informa tion supplied by others, as described in 
section 3.7; 
 i. any reliance on assumptions provided by ot hers, as described in  section 3.8; and 
 
j. results of the profitability analysis , in a format comparable to the profitability 
metric  targets described in section 3.1.1(b) , and the material results of any 
additional profitability analysis  that was performed. 
 4.2  Additional Disclosures—The actuary should also include the following disclosures, as 
applicable, in an actuarial communication: 
 
a. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, secti on 4.2, if any material assumption or method 
was prescribed by applicable law (statute s, regulations, and other legally binding 
authority); 
 b. the disclosure in ASOP No. 41, section 4.3, if the actuary states reliance on other 
sources and thereby disclaims responsibility for any material assumption or method selected by a party othe r than the actuary; and  
  c. the disclosure in ASOP  No. 41, section 4.4, if, in the actuary’s professional 
judgment, the actuary has othe rwise deviated materially from the guidance of this 
ASOP.   
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
11 Appendix 1 
 
Background and Current Practices  
 
Note:  This appendix is provided for informational pur poses and is not part of the standard of 
practice.  
Background 
 
Pricing life insurance and annuity  products is a complex process and requires management to 
make decisions based on a variety of inputs that often include analyses of profitability and risk 
performed by actuaries. The roles performed by actuaries when pricing are significant and 
varied. They can range from technical analysis of  profitability to the de velopment of marketing 
strategies for a proposed product. While the final decisions on product design, price, and 
marketing are the responsibility of manage ment, information necessary for making those 
decisions is most often provided by actuaries.  Management must balance business growth, 
profitability, and other strategic goals when se tting the parameters for a proposed new product. 
Actuaries are typically asked to evaluate the profitability and risk inherent in those parameters. 
Management relies on actuarial an alyses to make decisions that impact the ability of the 
insurance company to meet its goals in the future. 
  
Several ASOPs currently address various aspects of the pricing of life insurance and annuity 
products. Examples include the following:  
 ASOP No. 2,  Nonguaranteed Charges or Benefits for Life Insurance Policies and 
Annuity Contracts ;  
 
 ASOP No. 7, Analysis of Life, Health, or Prope rty/Casualty Insurer Cash Flows ;  
 
 ASOP No. 12, Risk Classification (for All Practice Areas) ; and  
 
 ASOP No. 15, Dividends for Individual Participat ing Life Insurance, Annuities, and 
Disability Insurance . 
 This ASOP supplements the guidance provided by existing ASOPs and provides guidance to 
actuaries providing actuar ial services related to the pric ing of life insurance and annuity 
products, including riders att ached to such products. 
 
Most life insurance and annuity products provide multi-year guarantees in the form of a fixed 
premium, guaranteed benefits, or limits on th e ability of the company to change future 
premiums, fees, or benefits. In th ese situations, the company must commit to the price before the 
product is sold and may have to honor that commit ment for a lifetime. It is critical that the 
actuarial analyses supporting that commitment meet accepted standards. 
  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
12 Current Practices 
 
Pricing life insurance and annui ty products typically requires de veloping an actuarial model to 
apply expected future experien ce to measure the risk s inherent in the product design and the 
likely future profit. Setting the assumptions for future experience is typically the role of the 
actuary, although at times ei ther regulation (for example, unisex legislation) or management will 
mandate the use of a certain assumption. 
 
Developments in consumer preferences and medical science will continue to affect policyholder 
behavior, future mortality rates, and product profita bility. Other examples of  existing trends that 
are expected to affect life insurance and annuity product pr icing include the following: 
 
 Principle-based approaches to determining statutory accounting requirements provide 
more flexibility and responsibility for actua ries in establishing the assumptions and 
methods that are used in that context. 
 
 Vendors and other third parties are playing increasingly import ant roles in the traditional 
pricing and product di stribution functions. 
 
 Risks and opportunities are created by ne w distribution models, disruptive market 
entrants, and technology. 
  
  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
13 Appendix 2  
 
Comments on the Second Exposure Draft and Responses  
 
The second exposure draft of this proposed ASOP, Pricing of Life Insurance and Annuity 
Products , was issued in June 2017 with a commen t deadline of October 31, 2017. Six comment 
letters were received, some of which were subm itted on behalf of multiple commentators, such 
as by firms or committees. For purposes of this appendix, the term “commentator” may refer to 
more than one person associated with a particular comment letter. The Life Insurance and Annuity Pricing Task Force carefully considered  all comments received, reviewed the exposure 
draft, and proposed changes. The Life Committee and the ASB reviewed the proposed changes and made modifications  where appropriate. 
 Summarized below are the signifi cant issues and questions contai ned in the comment letters and 
responses.  The term “reviewers” in appendix 2 includes the Li fe Insurance and Annuity Pricing Task Force, 
the ASB Life Committee, and the ASB. Also, unl ess otherwise noted, the section numbers and 
titles used in appendix 2 refer to those in the seco nd exposure draft. 
 
TRANSMITTAL MEMO RANDUM QUESTIONS 
Question 1: Is it clear what actuarial services are covere d in section 1.2, Scope? If not, please give an example 
of an actuarial service or a product whose exclusion is unclear and how to clarify. 
Comment All commentators who answered  this question answered “yes.” Three of these commentators included 
additional comments, which the reviewers addressed in the relevant section. 
Question 2: Throughout the ASOP, th ere are references to “the criteria of  the actuary’s principal.” Are the 
examples in section 3.1.1, Criteria of the Actuary’s Prin cipal, adequate to apply th e guidance included in the 
draft ASOP?  
Comment 
 All commentators who answered this question answer ed “yes.” Two of these commentators included 
additional comments, which the reviewers addressed in the relevant section. 
Question 3: Is the guidance in sectio n 3.6, Governance and Controls, clear?   
Comment 
 All commentators who answered this question answer ed “yes.” Two of these commentators included 
additional comments, which the reviewers addressed in the relevant section. 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested organiza tional changes to the document. 
 
The reviewers considered the suggestions and ma de those that they believe improve the ASOP. 
Comment 
 
Response Several commentators suggested minor editorial changes throughout the ASOP. 
 
The reviewers considered the suggestions and ma de those that they believe improve the ASOP. 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
14 Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator encouraged the ASB to minimize areas of overla p between the life and annuity 
pricing ASOP and ASOPs that are currently in development and, where overlap is unavoidable, to strive 
for consistency. 
 The reviewers note that sections in the life and a nnuity pricing ASOP were created with other draft 
ASOPs in mind for consistency. Specifically, the reviewers believe it is appropriate to include guidance 
regarding modeling and assumption setting, two areas being addressed by draft ASOPs, in the life and 
annuity pricing ASOP. 
SECTION 1. PURPOSE, SCOPE, CROSS REFERENCES, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
Section 1.2, Scope 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested clarifyi ng whether long-term care riders or benefits were included in the 
scope of this ASOP. 
 The reviewers addressed the comment by adding an example to the fifth paragraph of section 1.2. 
Comment  Response One commentator said that th e second paragraph seemed to  contradict section 3.1.2. 
 The reviewers note that items listed in section 3.1.2 are items that should be taken into account when 
preparing for pricing. The reviewers do not believe  clarification is needed, and therefore made no 
change. 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested adding language stating that the actuary should use professional judgment 
to determine whether a product is in scope if the product does not obviously fall into the scope described 
in section 1.2. 
 
The reviewers agree and added languag e consistent with the suggestion. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested including the review of pricing work in the scope of the ASOP. 
 
The reviewers believe that the revi ew of actuarial services is alr eady included per the definition of 
“actuarial service” in the Code of Professional Conduct  and ASOP No. 1, Introductory Actuarial 
Standard of Practice , and therefore made no change. 
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator suggested deleting the sentence “Actua rial services may also include advising on the 
design of the product” and adding “design” in the following sentence: “Although the actuary needs to be 
mindful of all considerations that may affect the ultimate price and design of the product.” 
 The reviewers noted the comment and deleted the reference to design. 
Comment   
Response One commentator suggested revisions to clarify the types of investment products that are out of scope of 
this ASOP.  
The reviewers revised the language to  address the commentator’s concern. 
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS 
Section 2.1, Modeling Cell 
Comment 
 
 
Response Two commentators suggested changes to the definition to clarify it and make it more consistent with 
existing ASOPs. 
 
The reviewers note that the use of the definition w ithin this ASOP is focused on the liability model 
rather than the asset model. The definition is consistent with the definition in ASOP No. 52, Principle-
Based Reserves for Life Products under the NAIC Valuation Manual , but has been slightly revised to 
better fit the scope of this ASOP. Ther efore, the reviewers made no change. 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
15 Section 2.2, Pricing  
Comment 
 
  
Response One commentator said that the definition of pricin g seemed too narrow, considering the scope of the 
guidance in the rest of the ASOP. The commentator also said that the definition did not recognize that 
the actuary may not set final charges and benefits/credits.  
The reviewers believe that the definition adequately describes the pricing process. The reviewers also 
believe that further guidance with regard to the pricing process is more appropriately presented in other sections of the ASOP. Therefore, the reviewers made no change. 
Comment   
Response One commentator recommended expand ing the definition to include “credits” along with charges and 
benefits and address guaranteed  and nonguaranteed elements. 
 
The reviewers incorporated some of the suggested revisions to the definition. 
Section 2.3, Profitability Analysis  
Comment  
 Response One commentator recomm ended including analysis of various levels (for example, model cell) in the 
definition. 
 The reviewers believe that further guidance with regard to the pricing process is more appropriately 
presented in other sections of the ASOP, and therefore made no change. 
Section 2.4, Profitability Metric  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested replacing “met ric” with “measure” for clarification. 
 
The reviewers believe that the definition is consis tent with common usage and is used appropriately 
throughout the ASOP, and therefore made no change. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator recommended including the examples of profitability metrics as part of the definition. 
 
Given the importance of profitability metrics, the re viewers believe it is more appropriate to list the 
examples in section 3.2.1, and therefore made no change. 
Section 2.5, Risk Capital 
Comment   
 
Response One commentator questioned the reference to “severe ri sk,” stating that “risk capital” is designed to 
address events significant enough to adversely affect  the expected profitability of a product, and that 
some people may not consider such events “severe.” 
 
The reviewers agree that the definition needed  to be clarified and revised the language. 
SECTION 3. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 
Section 3.1, Initial Pricing Considerations 
Comment 
 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that the ASOP focused on profitability metrics to the exclusion of items 
such as the patterns of reserves an d capital and the examination of individual scenarios in stochastic 
testing. 
 
The reviewers note that section 3.1.1(b) addresses patterns of reserves. The reviewers agree with the 
comment regarding stochastic testing and added language  to section 3.5.3 (now section 3.5.2) consistent 
with the suggestion. 
Comment   
Response One commentator suggested replacing the phrase “take into acco unt the criteria of the actuary’s principal 
and the relevant characteristics of the product” in the first paragraph with “consider the following.” 
 
The reviewers disagree with the suggestion, and therefore did not make the change. 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
16 Section 3.1.1, Criteria of the Actuary’s Principal 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested moving “criteria of the actuary’s principal” to the end of section 3.1. 
 
The reviewers disagree with the suggestion, and therefore did not make the change. 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator suggested changing the language from “include, but not limited to” to “may” in the 
first sentence. 
 
The reviewers disagree with the suggestion, and therefore did not make the change. 
Section 3.1.1(a) 
Comment   
Response One commentator stated that the description cont ributed to confusion about whether metrics are a 
measurement basis or a number, and suggested revisions.  
The reviewers believe that metrics are appropriat ely defined in section 2.4 as measurements and 
distinguished from numbers via section 3.1.1(b), which addresses targets for these metrics. The 
reviewers made revisions to address the commentator’s suggestions, including moving the reference to 
aggregate product and modeling cell levels from 3.1.1(a) to 3.1.1(b). 
Section 3.1.1(b) 
Comment   
Response One commentator noted the absence of guidance on setting targets if they are not included in the criteria 
of the principal.  
The reviewers believe that guidance on setting target s for profitability metrics that are not included in 
the criteria of the principal is outside the scope of the ASOP, and therefore made no change. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested changi ng “metrics” to “results.” 
 
The reviewers disagree and retained the word “metrics.”  
Section 3.1.1(c) (now section 3.1.1[d]) 
Comment   
Response One commentator suggested adding the words “the type and” prior to “the level of risk contained in the 
product being priced.”  
The reviewers addressed the comment by revising section 3.1.1(c) (now section 3.1.1[d]) and by adding 
a new section 3.1.1(c). 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator asked for clarification of “risk management policies” and noted that concrete 
examples would be helpful. 
 The reviewers addressed the comment by revising section 3.1.1(c) (now section 3.1.1[d]), adding a new 
section 3.1.1(c), and revising the example. 
Section 3.1.2, Relevant Characteristics of the Product 
Comment  
 Response One commentator questioned whether the actuary should consider unintended consequences for the 
product. 
 The reviewers believe this situation is addressed in section 3.5.2 (now section 3.5.1), and therefore made 
no change. 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested replacing this section with a term such as “policy considerations” and 
defining the term in section 2, citing concerns that the list was not all-inclusive. 
 
The reviewers prefer to enumerate these characteristics in the body of the standard to give these 
considerations appropriate emphasis. Given that the section states that considerations are not limited to 
this list, additional considerations may apply. The reviewers therefore made no change.  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
17 Comment 
 
Response One commentator stated that laws and re gulations are not product characteristics. 
 
The reviewers believe that applicable laws directly impact the product, and therefore made no change. 
Comment 
 Response One commentator proposed adding risk mitigation st rategies to the list of product characteristics. 
 The reviewers agree and made revisions consistent with the suggestion in a new section 3.1.2(e). 
Section 3.1.2(b)  
Comment  
Response One commentator suggested adding “anticipat ed” before “sales” and deleting “goals.” 
 
The reviewers agree and made the changes. 
Section 3.2.2, Considerations Wh en Selecting Profitability Metrics 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested moving discount rates from section 3.4.4(f) to section 3.2.2, because they 
are not assumptions. 
 
The reviewers agree with the commenter’s reasoning and moved the language on discount rates to section 3.2.1. 
Section 3.2.2(b) 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator pointed out that product risk and cap ital-intensity are not necessarily related, and cited 
Whole Life as an example. 
 
The reviewers revised the language to  address the commentator’s concern. 
Comment 
 Response One commentator suggested adding a point to refe r to the limitations of the profitability metric. 
 The reviewers agree and modified section 3.2.2(c) to include limitations as an example of other 
considerations the actuary may determine to be relevant. 
Section 3.3, Developing the Model 
Comment  
 Response One commentator suggested including the situation of  the actuary as user but not developer of the 
model. 
 The reviewers added “or select” after “the actuary should develop” the model. 
Comment  Response One commentator suggested changing “use s” to “reflects” in section 3.3(g). 
 The reviewers addressed the comment by replaci ng “use” and “incorporate” with “accommodate” 
throughout section 3.3. 
Section 3.3(b), Granularity  
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator suggested shortening the description of granularity to “the degree to which (1) the 
number of modeling cells represents the number of di fferent policy characteris tics, and (2) the modeling 
cells reflect different assumptions or tim e intervals,” and deleting the example. 
 The reviewers revised the language to address the commentator’s concerns.  
Section 3.3(f), Accounting and Actuarial Bases  
Comment 
 
Response Several commentators asked for clarification or sugg ested revisions to “accoun ting and actuarial bases.” 
 
The reviewers revised the language to clarify “accounting and actuarial bases” and address the 
commentators’ concerns. 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
18 Section 3.3(j), Risk Mitigation  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested moving examples of risk mitigation strategies to section 3.1.2. 
 
The reviewers agree and made changes consistent with the comment. 
Section 3.4, Pricing Assumptions 
Comment   
Response One commentator noted that it was not clear how sections 3.4.1.2 and 3.4.1.3 differed from 3.4.1 and 
3.4.1.1.  
The reviewers note that sections 3.4.1.1, 3.4.1.2, and 3.4.1.3 elaborate on the guidance provided in 
section 3.4.1. 
Comment 
 
 
 
 Response One commentator asked whether this section was too detailed given that a proposed ASOP on setting 
assumptions is also in development. The commen tator also asked whether there were any special 
considerations related specifically to setting pricing assumptions and noted the risk of guidance in 
different ASOPs conflicting. 
 The reviewers believe the guidance is appropriate fo r actuaries when performing actuarial services as 
defined in section 1. The reviewers note that ne w standards address conflicts with other ASOPs. 
Therefore, the reviewers made no chan ge in response to this comment. 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested adding references to ASOP Nos. 23, Data Quality , and 25, Credibility 
Procedures , in section 3.4. 
 The reviewers moved the reference to ASOP No. 25 to the end of the section so that it applies to all of 
section 3.4. The reviewers note that a reference to ASOP No. 23 is alre ady included in section 3.7, and 
therefore did not add another in this section. 
Section 3.4.1, Historical Experien ce Used When Setti ng Assumptions 
Comment 
 Response One commentator suggested deleting this section. 
 The reviewers note that this section sets up the associated considerations in sections 3.4.1.1, 3.4.1.2, and 
3.4.1.3, and therefore made no change.  
Section 3.4.1.1, Assumptions Based on Relevant and Credible Data 
Comment  
 
Response One commentator suggested adding “smoothness and data quality” as a reason to modify the 
assumptions.  
 
The reviewers revised the language by adding a reference to data deficiencies. The reviewers also 
eliminated the reference to “circumstances being m odeled” and added “are reasonable for the intended 
purpose” to the first paragraph of section 3.4. The reviewers believe that, with this revision, smoothness 
is adequately addressed in the first paragraph of section 3.4, and therefore did not make the suggested 
change. 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested moving the reference to ASOP No. 25 to section 3.4. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
Section 3.4.2, Assumption Margins 
Comment   
Response One commentator suggested deleting “such as when a new product is being introduced to the 
marketplace” in section 3.4.2(a).  
The reviewers agree and made the change. 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
19 Section 3.4.3, Consistency of Assumptions 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested clarifying the phrase “other components of the model.” 
 
The reviewers agree and revised the sentence to r ead, “The actuary should use assumptions that are 
internally consistent and reflect any interdependencies with each other ….” 
Comment 
 Response One commentator suggested that the interaction of  different assumptions should be considered. 
 The reviewers agree and added appropriate language. 
Comment   
Response  One commentator suggested that exam ples be included after the phrase “… consistent with assumptions 
used for other assignments within the entity.”  
The reviewers believe the language is suffici ently clear and therefore made no change.  
Section 3.4.4, Product Design and Assumption Setting (now Assumption Setting)
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested deleting “Product Design” from the title. 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change. 
Comment 
 
Response  One commentator sought clarification of the phrase “classification of future applicants” in 3.4.4(c). 
 
The reviewers replaced “classification” w ith “risk selection and classification.” 
Comment 
  
Response  One commentator suggested adding “population characteristics” to the mortality and morbidity 
assumptions considerations in 3.4.4(c).  
The reviewers believe the comment is adequately addressed, and therefore made no change. 
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested adding the phrase “if th ose features exist in the product” to the end of 
section 3.4.4(g) (now section 3.4.4[f]). 
 
The reviewers do not believe the suggested wording is necessary, and therefore made no change. 
Comment 
 
 Response  One commentator suggested adding “other” before “nonguaranteed elements” in section 3.4.4(g) (now 
section 3.4.4[f]). 
 The reviewers revised the sentence to referen ce nonguaranteed elements prior to dividends.  
Comment 
  
 
Response  One commentator suggested replacing “distribution channel through which the product will be sold” in 
the second-to-last paragraph of section 3.4.4 with th e “relevant product consider ations” that are listed in 
section 3.1.2. 
 
The reviewers deleted “distribution channel through which the product will be sold” and added the items 
from section 3.1.2 that the actuary should consider in setting assumptions.  
Comment 
 
 
Response  One commentator suggested deleting the word “incorporating” from the last paragraph and that the 
paragraph should be broadened to apply to more sections of the proposed ASOP. 
 
The reviewers believe including “incorporating” is appropriate and did not de lete it. The reviewers 
believe that expanding “incorporating the view of experts” into other areas of the ASOP is not 
necessary, and therefore did not make that change.  
Section 3.4.5, Capita l Market Assumptions
Comment 
 
 Response  One commentator recomm ended revising the language in the last sentence from “to assure that it aligns” 
to “to assess how well it aligns.” 
 The reviewers agree and made revisions consistent with the comment.  
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
20 Comment 
 
 
 Response  One commentator recommended deleting the entire “Capital Markets Assumption” section, stating that 
the first sentence is covered in both “Consistency of Assumptions” and “Assumption Setting,” and the 
second sentence is too detailed and prescriptive for an ASOP. 
 The reviewers agree with regard to the first sentence  and deleted it. The reviewers disagree with regard 
to the second sentence and retained it, but note that the sentence has been revised in response to another 
comment.  
Section 3.4.6, Documentation of Assu mptions, Their Rationale,  and Data Modifications (now Documentation of 
Assumptions, Rationale, and Data Modifications)
Comment 
 
Response One commentator recomm ended moving all references of documentation to section 3.8. 
 
The reviewers did not move all references to docume ntation to section 3.8, as it is ASB practice to 
include guidance relating to documentation, as appropriate, thro ughout section 3.  
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested adding a documentation requirement if the company sets a design or price 
that is different from wh at the actuary recommends. 
 The reviewers disagree, and therefore made no change.  
Section 3.5, Risk Evaluation
Comment  
Response One commentator suggested replacing “evaluate the impact on profitability metrics from deviations in 
assumptions” with “condu ct a risk evaluation.” 
 
The reviewers made changes co nsistent with the comment. 
Comment 
  
Response One commentator suggested including “the impact of product design features” in addition to risk 
mitigation strategies in the last paragraph.  
The reviewers believe that the existing reference to product design features in section 3.4.4(g) (now 
section 3.4.4[f]) already addresses the comment. Therefore, the reviewers made no change. 
Section 3.5.1, Cost of Capital (deleted)  
Comment 
  
 
 Response One commentator asked for clarifica tion of “Cost of Capital,” because “Cost of Capital” could be the 
hurdle rate, which is the estimated minimum required  rate given the level of risk, and it is usually 
determined by a company’s Treasury department. The co mmentator also said that “Cost of Capital” in 
the draft guidance might be interpreted as the required capital amount. 
 The reviewers eliminated the term “cost of capital” throughout the AS OP. The concept of cost of capital 
was moved from section 3.5.1 to section 3.1.1(c). 
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested that Cost of Capital may fit better under “Initial Pricing Considerations.” 
 
The reviewers agree and moved the section to section 3.1.1(c). 
Comment  
  
Response One commentator stated that the three uses of “p rofitability metrics” in this section description 
contributed to confusion about whether metrics ar e a measurement basis or a number, and suggested 
replacing “profitability metrics” with “profitability targets.”   
The reviewers agree and revised sections 3.5 and 3.5.1 (now section 3.1.1[c]) to eliminate the use of 
“profitability metrics” an d replaced “metrics” with “results” in section 3.5.3 (now section 3.5.2).  
Section 3.5.2, Sensitivity Analysis (now section 3.5.1)
Comment 
 Response One reviewer suggested that sensitivity  analysis should not be required. 
 The reviewers disagree and therefore made no change. 
 ASOP No. 54—Doc. No. 193  
21 Section 3.5.3, Stochastic Analysis (now section 3.5.2)
Comment 
 
Response One commentator suggested deleting the phrase “the level of” in the last sentence. 
 
The reviewers revised the language to  address the commentator’s concern. 
Suggested Addition: Section 3.5.4, Ri sk Identification and Classification
Comment 
  
 
Response One commentator suggested adding a risk evaluation technique, “Risk Identification and Classification - 
The actuary should consider identifying the types of risk in the product and classifying them (for example, high, medium, or low).” 
 
The reviewers believe that this type of exercise is outside the scope of the ASOP, and therefore did not make the change. 
Section 3.6, Governance and Controls  
Comment 
 
 
 Response One commentator said that the language used in the second sentence may imply that the list of 
governance and controls are requirements and suggested changing the sentence to “examples of 
governance and controls may include the following.” 
 The reviewers clarified the language by adding th e word “possible” before “governance and controls” 
and eliminating the phrase “but are not limited to.” 
Comment 
 
 
 
 
 Response One commentator suggested replacing “the product’s expected impact on  the company’s future financial 
and risk position” with “the future financial impact of the product,” noting that in practice, pricing is 
done on a standalone product basis, rather than on a portfolio basis. The process of considering the 
impact on the company’s financials and risk profile can be part of the forecasting and Enterprise Risk 
Management process rather than a pricing exercise. 
 The reviewers agree and made the change, but also added the word “expected” before “future financial 
impact.” 
Comment 
 
 
Response One commentator suggested that do cumenting the governance and controls in pricing is a reasonable 
requirement and recommended replacing the phrase “should consider” with “should.” 
 
The reviewers agree and made the change.  
Comment 
 
Response One commentator sought clarification for item (c), “separation of duties.” 
 
The reviewers deleted “separation of duties” from the list of examples because the phrase could be a 
component of each of the other examples. 
Comment  Response One commentator suggested adding “another” before the words “knowledgeable party.” 
 The reviewers agree and made the change. 
SECTION 4. COMMUNICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES 
Section 4.1, Actuarial Communications 
Comment   
Response One commentator suggested documenting in the actuarial report the competitive analysis that was used 
in the pricing analysis.  
The reviewers believe the comment is addressed in th e revised section 4.1(a), “r elevant characteristics of 
the product, as described in section 3.1.2.” 
Comment 
 
 Response One commentator suggested replacing “profitability metrics used to evaluate profitability” with 
“profitability metrics used in the profitability analysis.” 
 The reviewers agree and made the change. 
 
 
